Creating business plans. Creating business plans. Why write a business plan? Why write a business plan? You're energized, inspired, ready to forge ahead. You have a brilliant idea for a new product or service. First step, write a business plan. You might be thinking, why should I bother taking the time to draft a formal plan? Shouldn't I just get it going already? If you're working at a large company and your boss asks you to put together a plan before you move forward with a new product extension, you may feel equally frustrated. What's the point of all this busy work? Why can't I just take the plunge? But don't fall into this trap. Writing a business plan for internal or external ventures is beneficial in a variety of ways, including getting buy-in, generating enthusiasm for your idea, improving your odds of success, creating a new product or service, establishing a company, raising capital, generating sales, and sustaining your business over time. Whether you're planning to build a new company from scratch, expand an existing firm, spin off from a parent corporation, or even start an initiative within an established organization, writing a business plan gives you the opportunity to thoroughly evaluate your idea. It's also a way for your audience, namely potential investors, managers, and the people who control vital resources you need to start and operate your business, to assess the feasibility of your concept. The goal is to create a roadmap for your business that helps you navigate the opportunities and inevitable obstacles that you'll face, and perhaps most importantly, develop strategies to avoid problems before they arise. Getting Started Most business plans devote too much ink to numbers and too little to the information that matters most to potential investors, according to William Salmon, a professor at the Harvard Business School and an expert in entrepreneurial ventures. After all, savvy investors understand that financial forecasts for a new company, particularly detailed month-by-month projections that extend for years and years, are typically nothing more than wildly optimistic fantasies. In light of this, Salmon recommends organizing your business plan around a framework that assesses four factors critical to every new venture. Number one, the people. Number two, the opportunity. Number three, the context. Number four, the risk and reward. With Salmon's four critical factors in mind, you're ready to start thinking about what information you'll gather to create the most compelling business plan. As you begin your research, ask yourself some important questions. What's your purpose? If your business plan is a proposal within the resource-rich environment of a large corporation, certain parts of it can be shorter and less developed than other sections. In this case, you ought to focus on the value proposition and competitive analysis. On the other hand, if you're using the plan to raise money for venture capitalists, you ought to focus more on the opportunity itself and the management team. Who's your audience? Knowing who will be reading your plan and why, and having some sense of their goals and needs, will help you tailor your message. To learn about your audience's particular requirements and motivations, do your research. Tap your network. Ask colleagues and industry professionals for their views on the problem you're trying to solve. What do you want? Think about your ultimate goal. Do you need a corporate stamp of approval or the active support of upper management? Are you just looking for funding, or do you want connections with other investors or business partners? Do you want to repay a loan, or are you willing to share ownership and profits? What information will you need? Now that you've organized your thoughts, you need to determine whether or not you have all the relevant material on hand. Some of this will be financial and legal information. For example, have you confirmed the necessary production costs for your product? Have you considered the most appropriate legal structure and tax status for your business? There are many sources for this kind of information. You should identify trade journals that target business owners in your industry. Seek out research by respected analysts and scour your network for experts who may be able to help you develop a fuller picture of the business environment. Online resources are also available, including your local chamber of commerce, website, and the official sites of the Small Business Administration, the Internal Revenue Service, the Census Bureau, and the State Departments of Economic Development. The Structure of a Business Plan The most common business plan structures begin with a short general summary, and then proceed to a more in-depth analysis and explanation of the body of the plan. Writing a business plan is a big undertaking that requires time, dedication, and discipline. Rather than tackling it all at once, go section by section. Dividing the tasks into manageable chunks will help you better plan your time. Throughout the process, seek input from others. Most business plans contain the following components, which we'll cover in more detail throughout the book. Cover page – this ought to include the name of your business or project, as well as your name and contact information. Table of contents – an at-a-glance view of which topics should be covered. Use straightforward language to allow readers to easily skim or flip through to find what they're looking for. Summary – a brief and formal explanation of what your company is, where you want to go, and why it will be useful. A business description – a high-level overview of your proposed venture. Industry background – historical data, as well as current information about the shape, size, trends, and key features of the industry. A competitive analysis – a breakdown of current and prospective rivals. Market analysis – your assessment of your target customers and their wants, needs, and demographics. An introduction to your team, as well as a description of how they will work together to form an effective and successful unit. Operations plan – the flow of the business's daily activities and the strategies that will support them. Marketing plan – your detailed strategy for how you intend to sell your product or service. Financial plan – a synopsis of the current, status, and future projections of your company's financial performance. Attachments and milestones – additional documents that supply more detailed information about elements of the plan. Of course, not all business plans follow this model precisely. As you'll see, your plan may combine some of these sections, add new ones, and eliminate others based on your audience and its needs. Describing the opportunity – you know your idea inside and out, so it can be easy to lose sight of the details that will matter to investors when you draft your business plan. Ensure that your plan explains how your offering will help customers and places that offering within the larger business context, too. Presenting your idea – win readers over with a description of your idea that addresses a clear and specific business need, and provide details about the larger context within which your offering will thrive. To add customer focus to your plan, consider these questions. What customer pain are you easing with your offering? What special technology, new perspective, or unique concept will you offer customers that is better than what's available now? What will compel them to buy your product rather than their competitors? Your competitors. Even if you're not trying to raise a round of venture funding, and are instead trying to build a persuasive case for a new product or initiative within your company, you must make sure the business need is clear. Executive Summary The Executive Summary is a concise description of what your company is, where you want to go, and why it will be successful. Just one page, it gives readers an understanding of your proposal and captures their interest in your new venture. In some cases, this is the only section your time-pressed audience may read, so the key is to present your concept passionately, and lay out why you believe the business will be a resounding success, even as you acknowledge the risks and costs involved. A well-crafted Executive Summary will inspire your reviewers to read on. Sketching out your Executive Summary can give you a rough idea of what you plan to say, but rewrite and polish it once you finish drafting your entire business plan. Executive Summary typically includes the following elements. A Mission Statement. One or two sentences that describe what your business is about, its philosophy, and your vision for the future. A succinct description of the industry and market environment in which your new venture will develop and flourish. An explanation of the unique business opportunities that you'll be taking advantage of. A brief mention of the competitive advantages that differentiate your product or service from rival offerings. A rundown of the financial potential of your new venture, as well as the anticipated risks. A description of the management team and their respective roles. Information about the stage of the business. On the drawing board, in startup mode, ready to expand, etc., etc. Its financial status, whether you've raised any money or taken out any loans. And its structure, partnership, corporation, affiliate. Online resources such as the website of the Small Business Administration will be very helpful here. Details of the capital requested so that readers understand what you hope to gain from them, such as money, contacts in the industry, or other resources. Business description. The business description is another summary, but it differs from the executive summary because it provides a high-level, forward-looking overview of your proposed venture. This is the section of the plan where you go into greater detail about your business. Think of it as an extended elevator pitch that helps readers and potential investors quickly grasp the concept of your business and its value proposition. The business description must also demonstrate how an opportunity can grow. In other words, how the new venture can increase its range of products or services, expand its customer base, or widen its geographic scope. Analyzing the business environment. This section illustrates the potential of your idea within the context of its industry and market. We use the terms industry and market to describe separate but overlapping parts of the broader business environment. Industry refers to the group of companies that produce and sell products or services to the market. The market is where your product or services will be sold. The industry defines both your colleagues and your competitors. The market determines your opportunity and your customers. To clarify the context for your opportunity, address these two questions. Is the market for your new product or service big, growing fast, or, ideally, both? And is the industry now, or can it become, structurally attractive? That is, where sales or demographic trends are favorable. Why does this context matter? As William Solomon notes, investors seek out large or rapidly growing markets because getting a share of an expanding market is often easier than competing with established players for a share of a mature or declining market. Indeed, savvy investors try to spot markets with high growth potential early in their development because that's ultimately where the big payoffs are. Demonstrate an awareness of your new venture's environment and how it helps or hampers your particular proposal. You should include information on the macroeconomic situation as well as background on the range of government rules and regulations that will affect your plans. Here's a tip. As you research the industry background, competitive analysis and market analysis sections, document your sources. Support your claims about market growth and competitive strategies with verifiable information and expert sources such as a market research firm, trade association, or credible journalist. Industry background. The first element of the business environment analysis is industry background, which provides details about the shape and size as well as other important features of the industry. The following questions will help you frame your thinking. What is the industry? What is the industry's outlook? What competes in this industry? What are the industry's barriers to entry? Competitive analysis. The second part of evaluating the business environment is competitive analysis. In this section, you identify any direct and future competitors of your venture, describe the threats they represent to your success. Whether your target audience is potential investors or a corporate leadership board, your readers require that you thoughtfully appraise your current and potential rivals in order to weigh the viability of your idea. Here are some questions to consider. Who are your competitors? Think in terms of which companies solve the same problems. What are your competitors' strengths and weaknesses? What distinguishes your business from rivals? What is the competitive outlook for the industry? Market analysis. The final part of assessing the business environment is the market analysis. In this section, you should focus on your target market, the group of people or companies that will choose to purchase and remain loyal to your product or service because you solve a problem or meet a need for them better than your rivals do. This is where you demonstrate that there is indeed an opportunity within this market and that your new venture can capitalize on it. If you're trying to start a new program or initiative at your company, you should begin by talking to colleagues who are directly affected by the problem and will consequently benefit from the solution. Ask them, when did the issue start? How does it manifest? Marshall relevant reports, surveys, and other evidence. This will help you develop a full picture of the issue so you can tweak your idea to better solve the problem. Here are some fundamental questions this section must address. Who are your target customers? What are your prospective customers' critical needs? Why will customers in your target market purchase your product or service? Introducing your management team. Introducing your management team. Ask seasoned investors what they think is the key to converting a solid business plan into a successful venture and they will tell you, the people running it. Indeed, many investors say that the management summary is one of the first sections of a business plan they read. After all, it's the leadership team that makes a business work as a finely formed dynamic unit. That team includes not only the men and women who start and run the venture, but also the outside parties who provide important services or resources for it, such as lawyers, accountants, and suppliers, in addition to any people who serve as advisors or directors. If your audience is internal, the upper management of your division, for example, this section is an opportunity to show how your proposed team will work together to take on new responsibilities. Without the right team, no business idea will move from concept to reality. Your goal in the management summary section, therefore, is to extol the virtues of this team while providing answers to these three questions. What do they know? Whom do they know? And finally, how well were they known? Highlighting qualifications. Your management team's resumes will be included in the attachments portion of your business plan. To use the biographical section to call out selected aspects of their professional paths that are related to the venture. Where have your team members worked? What have they accomplished? What is their reputation in the business community? Are they realistic about the business's chances for success? How committed are they to this venture? Presenting the team as a unit. Use this section to describe how each of the team members will work to form as an effective unit, which will in turn result in a successful and profitable business. This is your opportunity to demonstrate that your team is the right one to manage risks and capitalize on potential opportunities. Affirm the team's strengths. Acknowledge and address the team's perceived weaknesses. Describe the team's management philosophy. Bringing your product to market. Providing detailed marketing and operations plans shows your readers that you consider the large and small elements of your business's future daily life. These plans provide you with the opportunity to think through possible roadblocks and solutions and to demonstrate your understanding of the factors that both help make the business function and create value for stakeholders. Operations plan. Articulating day-to-day business. The operations section of your business plan provides a general idea of the flow of everyday activities at your venture and the strategies that support them. This part should provide enough information to show that you understand and have planned for the daily execution of the business, but it should not be too technical or so comprehensive that the reader is either unable or unwilling to plow through it. A librarian can help you find the detailed information you need in reference books and trade journals. Trade associations are another good source of advice. They offer an array of resources to their members through newsletters and other publications as well as services such as conferences and seminars. As you begin to develop your operations plan, remember that visual aids such as charts, graphs, and tables can help you present complicated information clearly. Here are some key considerations for this section. What is your break-even point? How will you source supplies? What is your manufacturing or distribution process? Where is your business based? Who will work for you? The marketing plan, promoting your value proposition. Your marketing plan details how you intend to sell your product or service, that is, how you'll motivate customers to buy from you. Developing a coherent, comprehensive marketing strategy within your business plan helps you and your team pre-test ideas, explore options, and determine effective strategies for your venture success. Here are some key factors to consider as you create your marketing plan. Concentrate on the opportunity. What is the specific customer problem that your product or service solves? Focus on customer's buying behavior. When, where, why, and how do customers buy your product or service? What needs is fulfilled for them? Determine each customer's value to your business. Weighing the cost to acquire a customer against the long-term value of that customer helps you decide which marketing strategies are most appropriate. Review your own objectives. At what level of sales will you reach the break-even point, and when do you anticipate achieving that level? After that, how long will it take you to reach the next sales milestone? Defining your marketing mix. Your marketing mix describes how you will achieve your marketing objectives. Your choices will determine how you'll make the target market aware of your products, how you'll persuade customers within your target market to purchase it, how you'll build customer loyalty, and whether you will achieve the projected return on sales. Your strategies here also determine how you will position your product in the market relative to your competitors' products. The most effective mixes reflect the classic four P's of marketing, product, price, place or distribution, and promotion. Product and or service. Describe your product or service's form, functionality, special features, and architecture. Price. At what price point will you offer your product or service? Will there be an established price or will it be tiered or variable depending on consumer demand? Place or distribution. How will your product be transported to the end user? What distribution channels will you use? Promotion. How will you communicate with consumers and make them aware of your products? Projecting financial risk and reward. Projecting financial risk and reward. Your financial plan shows your readers the current status and future forecasts of the company's financial performance. As noted, financial projections need not be exhaustive, but they must be addressed. The financial picture you paint here represents your best estimate of the risks involved in the return on investment, usually over a period of three to five years. Even if you have expert advice, crunching the numbers yourself is a worthwhile exercise. The gritty work of building an income statement and a balance sheet will help you determine whether you will achieve your financial objectives. Balance sheet. This is an expression of the business's assets, equities, and liabilities at a specific point in time and is generally prepared by your accountants. Cash flow statement. This shows the times of peak need and peak availability of money and indicates whether your company is successfully turning its profits into cash. If your new business is a startup venture, pay close attention to cash flow in your financial plan. Although most people think of profits first, cash flow can be more important for a startup. The cash flow statement shows, in broad categories, how a company acquired and spent its cash during a given period of time. Anticipating reader concerns. Your financial plan provides a more complete picture of your proposal's future. As you craft this part of the business plan, consider your reader's perspectives. The investment committee member, for instance, will want to know whether your venture can achieve the company's hurdle rate, the minimum rate of return expected for all projects. On the other hand, the venture capitalist, considering buying into your venture, will want to know what kind of return on investment she will achieve. The bank or lender will want to know about the company's borrowing capacity and its ability to repay its debt when deciding whether to approve a loan. Let's look at some of the other sections that typically comprise a financial plan. Breakeven analysis. As noted earlier, the breakeven point is the pivotal moment when the business begins to be profitable. Breakeven is equal to fixed costs divided by sales minus variable costs divided by sales. This calculation is included in the attachments to your business plan. Assessing risk and reward. A risk-return graph can quickly show your readers the likelihood of failure or achieving the predicted levels of return and of phenomenal success. After all, measuring hypothetical investment returns without also measuring the amount of risk required to produce those returns is pointless. Most likely outcome is indicated in the area under the bell curve, ranging from an acceptable perhaps return of 15% to the most likely return of 30% and a possible 45% rate of return. Depending on the fundamental riskiness of the venture, the investors will require different rates of return to balance the possibility of loss. Anticipating financial returns. Investors also want to know the expected financial returns, typically either the return on investment ROI or the Internal Rate of Return, IRR. For an internal project, the financial return should exceed the company's hurdle rate. For a risky startup business, investors generally require a higher return to compensate for the higher level of risk of loss. To calculate the ROI, divide net operating income by total investments. Exit strategy. Your business plan should offer a candid proposal for the end of the process, according to William Saltman. How will the investor ultimately get money out of the business, assuming that it is successful? Even if only marginally so. Investors typically like to see companies that work hard to maintain and even increase a broad variety of exit options along the way. Your exit plan, for instance, may include taking your company public, merging your business with another one, or putting your company up for sale. Attachments and milestones. Attachments and milestones. Supplemental information. Attachments come at the end of the business plan and provide additional information for the reader without weighing down the body of the plan. This is often where you'll see things appended, such as a complete set of financial statements, including assumptions, income statements, cash flow statements, and balance sheets, the technological specifications of the product plan, and the formal resumes for each of the members of the management team. Milestones. A milestone plan gives your readers a timeline for your creation of a successful business. Develop an ambitious schedule that you can meet, while still giving yourself room to handle unexpected problems that may slow you down. An aggressive yet realistic plan will impress your investors. Include only major events, not each individual step, and choose milestones that can be clearly defined and easily measured. For example, prototype development, installation of a computer system, market testing completed, or first customer sale. Use generic dates, such as month 6 or year 1, rather than actual dates. Conclusion. Writing a business plan is part of the process of preparing your business for success, but the document that you create is not meant to be static. Once you've left the planning stages, regularly updating your business plan enables you to track your progress. Referring back to your business plan later in the process also helps you determine whether your original assumptions about the keys to your success are becoming realities. This provides valuable information.