Why delegate? Do you find your growing responsibilities and workload outstripping your available time? Are you spending most of the day completing tasks below your level of skill and authority? Do you lack the bandwidth for higher-level pursuits, such as analyzing your department's short- and long-term resource requirements? This is where delegating, or assigning tasks, projects, or functions to another person can reduce the demands on your time. Allowing you to develop your leadership skills while improving organizational productivity. Delegation is not just about the payoff for you. It's about the benefits for your staff and your organization as well. Purpose of Delegating When you delegate, you transfer responsibility for performing a task, completing a project, or executing a function to another person. You still retain authority, control, and responsibility with regard to the larger work, but the person to whom you delegate tends to the details. Delegating can have a profoundly positive effect on employees and the organization as well as the manager who delegates. Yet, it's an underutilized tool. Benefits of Delegation Delegation offers benefits to everybody. The benefits to you include reducing your workload and stress, delegating improves your coaching skills, and likely boosts your job satisfaction. Cleaving off tasks that others can accomplish allows you time to focus on work that requires a more particular skill set. Maximizing Impact This allows you to maximize your impact. The Benefits to Your Direct Reports By delegating to people on your team, you increase their motivation and confidence. You help them develop new skills. Some delegated tasks also allow direct reports greater exposure within your org, or even their industry. The Benefits to Your Organization Assigning work to the right people at the right level benefits an organization because it efficiently uses resources, improving productivity, and saving the company money. Effective Delegating Effective delegating also develops trust, and trust within your organization means more engaged workers. Delegation strengthens the lines of communication between you and your staff. Delegation is also an effective way of assessing staff members' capabilities before offering promotions. Building a Foundation for Effective Delegating Are you spending more time doing, less time managing? If you always seem to do too much rudimentary work, or if you find yourself on the job nights and weekends trying to keep up with endless lower-level administrative tasks, Assigning work to staff members could help free you up for other high-level activities, such as prepping for an important board meeting or policy development. If you are delegating, but you're regularly interrupted by direct reports, who have questions about their assignments, or if you need to intervene in delegated tasks or projects because of missed deadlines, or budget overruns, or overruled staff decisions, or even redoing poorly executed assignments, you could benefit from honing in on your delegation skills. Establish the Right Environment Creating a workplace that encourages and supports delegation can help you gain cooperation from your staff. Here are some tips to set you up in the right atmosphere. In regards to Making the Assignment When you delegate work, you're more likely to rally enthusiasm if you consider the following. Delegate entire projects or functions where possible, not just portions, to increase your employees' motivation and commitment. Avoid assigning tedious or difficult jobs alone. While sometimes it's necessary to share the grunt work, like database entry, on larger projects, Balance this less desirable job with tasks that captivate staff and might gain recognition for your employees, such as representing the team at a trade show. When delegating, give direct reports the resources they need to get the job done. Resources might be people, tools, training, information, development opportunities. Delegate to the people whose judgment and competency you trust. Develop trust in less skilled staff members by delegating highly structured assignments to them. Provide career advancement for staff members by delegating work that involves face time with your manager or with a high-level manager in another division. Communicating the Assignment Make certain that your staff knows what is expected of them and why a task is important. People are more motivated when they understand the reasons for doing certain things in a certain way and when they recognize the importance of their work. Link projects to larger sets of responsibility and to the unit's overall goals. Articulate the goals, expected outcomes, and measures of success. Create clear guidelines for follow-up, monitoring, and feedback. Cultivate independent thinking by asking questions rather than dictating orders. Encourage your people to come to you with problems, but groom them to also bring their own ideas, observations, and possible solutions. Encourage your staff to share their interests as well as their availability for new projects. Acknowledge that mistakes can be made, that delegating is a learning experience for you and your staff, and offer instruction and coaching as needed. Building a workforce open to delegation will make you a better delegator. The right culture for delegation is important. Look for applicants who are not only qualified for a task, but willing to grow, take on responsibility, learn and strengthen, and make informed decisions. Selecting people who are more than just their job descriptions allows your unit to make its best contribution to the organization overall. Give yourself time and space to think also has an impact on the delegating culture you're creating. Always ask the question, what's next? Your unit can't deliver top performance without a clear picture of where it's going. So once you've envisioned your unit's future, share it with your team. So everybody is clear and energized by the goals that you will achieve together and how you will achieve them. Addressing your concerns. Despite the benefits to everyone involved, many managers feel uneasy about delegation. You might fear that assigning your work to others will abdicate responsibility and lose control because you've relinquished day-to-day oversight. Or, perhaps for time, you might elect to do a job yourself rather than teach someone else how to do it. If you've been a leader for a while, you might shy away from delegation because you've had a bad experience with it. Gaining proficiency in delegation takes time and experimentation, but over the long run your fears should dissipate as you hone your skills and your staff gains confidence. Let's break down the mindset to overcome these common concerns. It's just easier to do it yourself. The thought of organizing, explaining, and monitoring an assignment can feel like it will add hours to the job that you just don't have. But that's a short-sighted view. The comparatively brief amount of time you spend will likely be worth it since, over time, your employees will be able to make and take on more responsibility for structuring and planning their own assignments. Another concern might be you're having a difficult time transitioning from specialist to generalist. You loved your functional job. You excelled at it. Then you were promoted. So when you think of delegating some of your work, you're reluctant to give up the very tasks for which you've become known and like you enjoy doing. However, this isn't saying goodbye to your knowledge and experience. That will be critical as you guide your staff through their assignments. Take a new product introduction as an example. You might not be developing and executing the marketing plan, but you'll be leading the team as they brainstorm and start the launch process, guiding them around obstacles and giving them the benefit of your experience. Or we might think that everyone knows you're the expert. If your direct report surpasses your skill set and becomes the go-to person in your specialty area, what will happen to your reputation? Maybe you've taken great pride in developing your expertise and projecting the return on investment for new client services. You may hesitate to pass that baton. It's normal to feel this way. By developing your people, you will serve your organization by widening the pool of available experts. This helps you grow in your role as a leader. Plus, when your direct reports are good, you look good. You might also have a concern that you lack confidence in your staff. Start by delegating the small tasks. Build their confidence. And your run. Or you might have a concern that you can't identify a staff member with the skills needed for this particular assignment. Train or coach an employee to develop the skills. Borrow a staff member from another group. Hire a temporary worker. Or explore dividing the assignment into subtasks for one or more of your employees to handle. You might have the concern you like things done your way. Focus your energy on communicating your preferences and quality standards rather than on controlling how the tasks will actually be completed. Your employees' approach may get the job done and demonstrate a different way to tackle the work. You may have the concern that you believe your staff will resent additional work. Don't dump grunt work on your people. Manage their expectations with open discussions. Let them know they'll get opportunities to do new and interesting work. Tell them how projects will expand their capabilities and that you'll support them in making their own decisions and then follow through. When you do have to assign dull administrative work or beastly projects such as organizing a cluttered image library, be upfront about it. Acknowledge that underneath this challenge is a task that may be beneath your employees' skill set and abilities. Here are the reasons why this project, in the larger context, will lessen the sense of drudgery and how it might motivate them to complete the work without resentment. A final concern you might have is that you know you can quickly complete a task an employee is struggling with. When you see someone spinning their wheels trying to extract information from the company knowledge base, it can be hard not to jump in and take over. But trust in your staff's ability to get the job done. Practice keeping silence. Give them a chance to figure it out and be available to provide support. Interceding can cause frustration for you both and cost you the time you'd hope to save. Preparing to delegate. Preparing to delegate. You may have an idea about a task you want to delegate, but before doing so, you want to do some prep work. Note the reasons for delegating. Determine exactly what work to hand off and what not to. Decide how large a slice of the work you want to delegate. Just a task or an entire function. And specify the skills required to successfully complete it. Next, identify the best person to complete it. Determine the level of authority to be delegated. These preparatory steps may seem like an overkill, but this will ensure that you make the right assignment to the right person for the right reasons. And increases your probability, and theirs, of success. Consider your reasons for delegating. As your moment over work, you can assign to someone else on your team. Take a moment to review why you're looking to delegate. What do you hope to achieve? Do you simply want to decrease your workload? Or do you need to offload lower-level administrative jobs so you can concentrate on a specific project? Perhaps your objective is to motivate your team members and improve morale by increasing their levels of responsibility or helping them extend their capabilities into new technologies and processes. Maybe it's a combination of reasons. Think through why you're looking to delegate. Because this will help you set clear goals and assess how well you've achieved your purpose once the assignment is complete. As you assess your workload to see which tasks, projects, or functions you might delegate, consider the following. Jobs that others could readily do. Although you probably enjoy some of the tasks that fall in this category, which can make them hard to give up, be open to delegating them. Jobs that require specific training or experience. Delegating this type of work can give staff members interesting and challenging opportunities. For example, training a reliable team member to take over your role on an enter-department task force would increase the employee's collaborative and technical skills as well as their visibility. Jobs deemed too important to delegate wholesale. Consider ways that you could share the responsibility. Could you subdivide the task or the project or the function so you can handle a discrete part and delegate the rest? Jobs that might be seen as unpleasant or boring. You can promote collaboration in a supportive environment by dividing the task among your staff members and doing it through yourself. When you divide in this way those less desirable tasks, it will give you a chance to seek input from your staff about the types of assignments that they would find appealing. Not all work, though, can or should be delegated. As a manager, you must retain responsibility for activities such as the following. Directing and motivating your team. Aligning your team's strategy with company goals. Evaluating employee performance. Helping your direct reports develop their careers. Hiring and firing staff members. Handling complex customer negotiations. Performing tasks that require your specific set of technical skills. Choose how much of the work to delegate. As you narrow your options, consider how much of the work you will transfer. You may choose to delegate by task, delegate by project, or delegate by function. Next, identify the skills required. Identify the skills required. Before selecting the person for a given assignment, analyze the job and determine the skill it requires. What kinds of thinking skills are needed for this job? Does the work require problem-solving ability? Logical thinking? Decision-making? Planning? Or creative design? What are the activities that must be performed in the assignment? And what systems or equipment will be needed? Do the activities involve creating a new database, for example, or organizing, training, or developing? What interpersonal skills are required? Things like negotiation with suppliers. Conducting interviews with experts. Handling delivery complaints. To illustrate this kind of analysis, let's imagine your group has been asked to customize the user manual for the company's new intranet, so employees in various departments will know how to use the features most relevant to their jobs. For corporate-level projects with company-wide visibility, the deadline is way too imminent for you to undertake the project alone. Shawna, a bright, energetic new hire with manual writing experience, is offered to lead the efforts. This sounds like a perfect opportunity, but before assigning it, you need to carefully evaluate what's involved and identify exactly the skill sets your project demands. So before assigning the project to your bright employee, evaluate what's involved, identify exactly the skill sets the project demands. In doing this, you might realize that the project requires deeper skills than the employee has at this point. Although they are skills, they have explicitly told you they want to develop. Instead of delegating the entire project, you might establish a project team with a more senior lead than Shawna and try to match her skills with specific project tasks that support the larger project. Her work on those tasks will then inform future assignments and help you identify training opportunities. When you have a number of assignments to delegate, it can be helpful to make up a log or spreadsheet upon which you can specify your criteria for each proposed item. Expected results, deadline, milestone, skills required, and so on. Use this tool to match people to jobs and to uncover where training might be necessary. This activity will also help you track how often you're using any one person for various types of jobs so you can better balance the dream assignments and the drudgery. So that's the most suitable person. Once you know what's required for a task, project, or function, review the strengths and weaknesses of your staff. Recognize that not all skills are transferable to all situations. As you compare skills required to the characteristics and capabilities of your staff members, keep these factors in mind. Growth and development. Development of new skills. Availability. Previous assignments. Assistance required. And time on the job. Avoid delegating only to those people who you know will accept the work without complaint. Why will staff members be flattered by your confidence but without proper compensation or recognition? Continually delegating to the same individual, even if only one, can lead to resentment, absenteeism, and even deflection. As you contemplate your options, don't hesitate to take advantage of the skills of more than one person. Keeping track of the special skills of your staff members and logging those skills into the spreadsheet discussed earlier will help you match people to assignments. When considering whom to assign work to, don't overlook people beyond your own group. Don't forget your supervisor or your peers and other groups as possible resources. In some instances, you may save time, money, and gain needed expertise by assigning work and talent outside of your organization, such as to consultants, freelancers, or other temporary workers. Don't forget your supervisor or your peers as possible resources. Don't overlook people beyond your own group. Decide on the level of authority to grant. The level of authority you choose to grant should depend on the requirements of the assignments. Assess the employee's capabilities and level of confidence in the person you've selected. Assess the employee's past performance in making decisions. Assess the consequences of wrong decisions and decide what degree of risk you're willing to take. Determine the minimum amount of authority your employee will need to complete the assignment successfully and efficiently. That is, you don't want your employee to have to come to you for approvals every step of the way. Several options exist along the broad spectrum of authority. Make and implement decisions as needed without prior consultation with you. Make decisions as needed but notify you before implementing them. Make recommendations for a final decision which you then must approve. Provide you with several alternatives from which you'll make a final decision. Or provide you with relevant information from which you'll develop alternatives and consult with your employee to reach a decision. Now that you've decided what to delegate and to whom, and at what level of authority, you can proceed to the next step, actually assigning the work. Making the assignment. Making the assignment. For your delegation to be successful, you must thoroughly describe the job and your expectations to the person who will be taking on the work. Put yourself in their shoes. As you communicate the scope and authority of the assignment, make sure you're transferring all of the necessary information. Equally important to the success of your delegated work is how well you communicate the scope and authority of the assignment to the other members of your team. Discuss the work with your staff member. Spend time going over the details of the job. Ideally, in a face-to-face meeting. To gain trust and avoid misunderstanding, discuss all aspects of the assignment. Your specific expectations. And get the employee's commitment to the project. At its core, the process of assigning the work involves ensuring that you describe a task, project, or function. Introduce background material. Identify the resources and support available. Establish a feasible timeline with agreed-upon deadlines. Explain the level of authority that you're granting. Agree upon standards of performance, measures of success, levels of accountability. Determine a process for follow-up and feedback. Discuss your possible involvement. Follow up your meeting with a memo outlining the key points of the discussion. Better yet, ask your employee to prepare a summary memo. This will give you an idea of how well your employee understands the assignment. Communicate with your team. Take the lead in communicating to your team the scope of the delegated assignments, plus any other relevant information. Clear and transparent messaging will deflect resentment and competitiveness on the part of the other staff members. Your forthright attitude and openness to discussion will help build that trust in you. Monitoring the assignment. Monitoring the assignment. Once you've delegated the work, shift into monitoring mode to ensure that everything goes as planned. Don't just assume all is going well until you've heard otherwise. Track the delegated assignments. Regularly check progress to make sure the assignment is on track, can be completed successfully, and on time. Confirm that all interim milestones that you've discussed with the employee have been met. Mentioning something like, I'll need to see the proposed design revisions by next Friday reflects your proper control of the work as a manager. Adding, let's meet Wednesday to see how you're progressing and discuss any problems, signals that you're monitoring the work and prepared to offer guidance if necessary. Use the tools at your disposal to keep track of progress. Close monitoring gives you opportunities to provide coaching and feedback. Keep in mind, however, the ultimate goal is successful and on-time completion, not how the work was done. Monitoring the assignment without micromanaging, allowing your employee to learn and grow as they tackle the work. Provide support. Continue to provide support but without being intrusive. Strike the balance between feedback and follow-up. Focus on results and not on the methods or approach used to achieve them. After the work begins, intercede with advice and directions only if requested. Point out any potential difficulties you may see based on your experience with similar projects. Clarify when you want to be involved, such as when it looks as though a commitment won't be met or major problems such as a misunderstanding with a peer arise. Review the resource needs and ensure that appropriate supplies are available. Notify the appropriate individuals of the authority you have granted in your staff member in delegating this assignment. Anticipate and address problems. Be alert to early signs of trouble. If your employee hits a roadblock or begins to fall behind, it may be necessary to intervene. You don't want to solve every problem that employees encounter. I would defeat the purpose of delegation, but you should use coaching, encouragement, and added resources as you see fit to help them help themselves. When an assignment falls off track, take the following steps to right it. Create a plan of action and a timetable for addressing the problem. Work with your staff member to make sure your solution is realistic and have the employee agree to the plan when it's final. Offer additional resources, if available, to provide assistance. Complete selected parts of the assignment to lighten the load of the employee, set an example, and ensure success. Delegate upward. Advocate to upper management on behalf of your staff member when escalation is necessary for a successful outcome. When addressing problems, be on the lookout for reverse delegation, which can occur when a staff member to whom you've delegated an assignment either wants to return the entire job to you or more likely suddenly shifts it back onto your plate by expecting you to solve problems and make decisions. Resist the temptation to step in. Instead, continue to help your employee complete the job. For a deeper understanding of how reverse delegation can hobble you, imagine this scenario. You're racing down the hallway to a meeting and one of your less experienced project managers, Chrysanthi, stops you and says, We've got a serious problem on that project you assigned me last week. She quickly outlines the issue. You don't have the information to make an on-the-spot decision, so you reply, Let me think about it. You've just allowed what Harvard Business Review authors William Onken Jr. and Donald L. Watts famously called a monkey to leap from Chrysanthi's back to yours. You're now working for your direct report. A better response would have been to ask Chrysanthi to draw up possible solutions, make a recommendation, and then debrief you. Actually, just brief you. Employees try to hand off monkeys when they lack the desire, ability, or confidence to confront them. Helping employees develop needed problem-solving skills can be more time-consuming than tackling problems yourself, but it saves time in the long run and fosters the development of a trusting relationship. When you encourage employees to handle their own monkeys, they acquire new skills and you have the time to do your own job. The following strategies can help deflect reverse delegation and keep assignments moving. Encourage the employee to come up with his or her own solutions and options. Help the employee assess the situation. Confirm your confidence in the employee's ability to make decisions. Provide positive reinforcements for the work done so far, and provide coaching to help the employee refine their new skills. In some situations, such as a missed deadline, you'll need to reassess your staff member's ability to successfully complete the assignments. Support the employee, but provide assistance only as necessary. Avoid placing blame, but make sure that he or she takes responsibility for mistakes that are clearly their own. Remember that mistakes should be viewed as growth opportunities, rather than as punishable offenses. Only in extreme cases, say when failure to meet established goals will have a serious negative impact on other projects, can you consider rescinding the delegation. Review the process. Review the process. Use what you learn from each delegation to increase your effectiveness in assigning work to your staff and to others, and in teaching delegating skills to your colleagues. Evaluate completed assignments. As delegated assignments are completed, take the time to reflect on what worked and what didn't. Jot down what you would do differently next time. Schedule debriefing with the person you delegated to, and review lessons learned from this assignment. These guidelines will help you use what you discuss to improve future delegation. Ask for feedback on how the assignment worked out. Recognize their achievements and provide positive reinforcement for the tasks that were well done. Compare the results with the agreed-upon deadlines and expectations. Avoid criticism and blame for any problems, but discuss possible improvements in future projects. If appropriate, create an action plan to support your direct report's growth through ongoing coaching or supplemental training. Teaching delegating skills to others. Developing your staff is essential to your job in achieving your group's financial goals. When you don't take advantage of delegating opportunities, you block the advancement of your staff, which can leave them resentful and disengaged. Consider how you might share delegating skills you've learned with other team leaders in your unit or division. In particular, newly designated managers. The following can help you strengthen delegation skills. Lead by example. Trust and empower rookie team leaders by delegating to them. Encourage risk-taking. Show how taking small risks to play to staff strengths pays off. Early success builds confidence. Identify what to delegate. Help team leaders divide complex projects into manageable chunks with clear milestones. Becoming proficient at delegating work can enhance your effectiveness as a manager, open opportunities for your staff, and benefit your organization. Seek additional information on delegating. Continue to sharpen your skills.