Finance basics. Why understand finance? Why understand finance? Finance matters to all companies because they all have to bring in money and spend it in order to do business. On the bringing in side, smart managers consider questions like, how much of our money comes from the owners? How much from sales? How much from borrowing? Which of our product lines and regions earn the highest profits? Which ones fail to perform? How long does it take to collect money that customers owe us? And on the spending side, are our costs what they should be? Are we spending the right amount on our people and on our fiscal assets such as office space and computer equipment? If we can invest in only one of several opportunities for growth, how do we determine which one would generate the most value? If we increase our output by 20%, will we make 20% more money? Your company's finance department, or bookkeeper, produces financial statements, budgets, and forecasts. By understanding these documents, you'll gain the information you need to ask essential questions and make smart decisions for your division, department, or team. Finance uses jargon that may be unfamiliar to you. Sometimes different terms mean exactly the same thing. Profit and earnings, for example, or sales and revenue. If you're not certain what a term means, just look it up in the key terms section at the end of this book. Navigating the three major financial statements. Navigating the three major financial statements. The underlying purpose of every company is to make money. If you're a manager, part of your job is to help your company earn a profit, ideally a bigger one each year. Wherever you work, you can improve the financial health of your organization by reducing costs, increasing revenue, or both. You can help the organization make good investments and use its resources wisely. The best managers don't just watch the budget. They look for the right combination of controlling costs, improving sales, and utilizing assets more effectively. They know how good a job the company is doing at turning profit into cash. They understand where revenue comes from and how the money is spent, and how much profit the company is making. To learn all this, managers rely primarily on three documents. The income statement, the balance sheet, and the cash flow statement. These are called financial statements, or just financials. Publicly traded companies, those that sell stock to the public on an exchange, make summary financial statements available to everyone, usually on a quarterly basis. Privately held companies owned by one person, a family, or a small group of investors often keep their financial statements private. But nearly every company produces detailed financials for internal use. Accounting methods. First, financial statements follow the same general format from one company to another. Individual line items may vary somewhat depending on the nature of the business, but the statements are usually simple enough that you can easily compare performance. The reason for the similarity is that accountants all follow the same set of rules. In the United States, those rules are generally called Generally Accepted Accounting Principles, or GAAP, G-A-A-P, pronounced G-A-A-P, G-A-A-P. Second, GAAP allows two different methods of accounting. Cash-based accounting is typically used by very small companies, and it's very simple. The company records a sale whenever it receives cash for a product or service, and records an expense when it issues a check. The other method, accrual accounting, is a little more complicated and far more common. The company records a sale whenever it delivers a product or service, but not when the cash changes hands. That might be a month or two later, when the customer pays the bill. It records an expense whenever it incurs one, not when it actually writes a check. The key to this method is what accountants call the Matching Principle. That is, match every cost to the revenue that is associated with it. Let's look at a small example. Amalgamated Hat Rack, an imaginary company that manufactures hat racks from imitation moose antlers, records revenue each time it ships racks to a customer. Because the customer hasn't paid yet, revenue always includes estimates of cash the company will receive in the future. When Amalgamated orders 2,000 brass hooks from its supplier, it doesn't record the expense of those hooks all at once. Rather, it records parts of the expense with every sale. If each hat rack has five brass hooks, the accountants record the cost of five brass hooks every time one hat rack is sold. Why use the accrual method? Because it gives you a more accurate picture of profit. If you work for a hat rack company, you want to know whether each hat rack you sell is profitable. To answer that question, you have to track the cost you incur and the revenue you bring in every time you make one and ship it to the customer. The Income Statement. The Income Statement tells you whether the company is making a profit. That is, whether it has positive net income according to the rules of accrual accounting. Income is just another word for profit, which is why the Income Statement is also called a Profit and Loss Statement, or a P&L. It shows a company's revenue, expenses, and profit or loss for a specific period of time, typically a month, a quarter, or a year. How does an Income Statement present this profit picture? It begins with the company's revenue, or total net sales, during the period it covers, and then lists all the various costs, including the cost of making the goods or delivering the services, the overhead expenses, taxes, and so on, and subtracts them from the revenue. The bottom line, what's left over, is the net income or profit. Let's look more closely at the line items that appear on an Income Statement. Cost of goods sold, usually abbreviated as COGS, is what it costs amalgamated to manufacture the hat racks. That includes raw materials, labor, and any other costs directly related to production. Subtract COGS from revenue, and you get gross profit, which shows how much the company made before paying its overhead, taxes, and so on. You can use this number to calculate gross margin, which doesn't appear on the Income Statement, but it's still an important number. Just divide gross profit by revenue. Marketing expenses, also known as sales, general, and administrative expenses, SG&A, or simply overhead, includes the salaries of administrative employees, rents, sales, and marketing expenses, and any other costs not directly attributed to manufacturing a product or delivering a service. The cost of the company's phone system, for example, would be included on this line. Depreciation is a way of estimating the cost of assets that last a relatively long time. A computer system, for example, might have a useful life of three years, so it doesn't make sense to record its entire cost in the first year. Rather, the company spreads the expense over the system's useful life. If the accountants employ a simple straight-line method of depreciation, they would record one-third of the total cost on the company's Income Statement each year. Subtract operating expenses and depreciation from gross profit, and you get operating income, often called Earnings Before Interest and Taxes, or EBIT. Subtract interest, costs, and taxes from EBIT, and you get net income, or profit. That is, the famous bottom line. Let's use an example. Using the Amalgamated Hat-Rack Income Statement, we can see that total sales revenue was $3.2 million. We then subtract the cost of goods sold, $1.6 million, for a gross profit of $1.6 million. We then subtract operating expenses of $800,000. We then subtract depreciation expenses of $42,500. This gives us an Earnings Before Interest and Taxes of $757,500. We then subtract interest expense, or $110,000. This gives us the Earnings Before Income Taxes, that's $647,500. Next we subtract Income Taxes, that's $300,000. This leaves us with a net income of $347,500. The Balance Sheet. The Balance Sheet is a snapshot. It summarizes a company's financial position at a given point in time, usually the last day of a year or a quarter. It shows what the company owns, that is its assets, what it owes, its liabilities, and the difference between them, called Owner's Equity or Shareholder's Equity. A Balance Sheet is called that because it always balances. That is, all the assets must equal all the liabilities plus Owner's Equity. This is sometimes known as the Fundamental Accounting Equation, and it looks like assets equals liabilities plus Owner's Equity. Here's why that equation holds true. Assets are everything a company owns. The category includes cash, land, buildings, vehicles, machinery, computers, and even intangible assets such as patents. It does not include people because the company doesn't own its employees. Of course, a company has to acquire these assets. It can use its own money, which is the money its owners have invested in, plus the company money it itself has earned over time, or it can use borrowed money. In Balance Sheet terminology, its own money is Owner's Equity and borrowed funds are liabilities. And because you can't get something for nothing, the assets need to equal liabilities plus Owner's Equity. If a company has $3 million in assets and $2 million in liabilities, it must have Owner's Equity of $1 million. Balance Sheet data are most helpful when compared with information from a prior year. The Balance Sheet begins by listing the most liquid assets, cash, and marketable securities, accounts receivable, that is, what customers owe as of the Balance Sheet's date, and inventory, along with any costs that have been paid in advance, that is, prepaid expenses. These are called Current Assets. Next, it tallies assets that are less liquid, for example, buildings and machinery, known as Property, Plant, and Equipment, PPE. These are called Fixed Assets or Long-Term Assets. Companies value their fixed assets according to what the assets originally cost. But because all fixed assets, other than land, depreciate over time, the accountants must also include any depreciation on those assets that they have recorded so far on income statements. Gross Property, Plant, and Equipment minus accumulated depreciation equals Net Property, Plant, and Equipment, in other words, the current book value of the company's fixed assets. Line items under Liabilities and Owner's Equity are pretty easy to understand. Accounts Payable is what the company owes its suppliers. Non-Tax Payable is what it owes the government. Accrued Expenses are funds owed for salaries or other costs not included under Accounts Payable. Short-Term Debt is debt that must be paid in less than a year. These are the company's Current Liabilities. Subtracting Current Liabilities from Current Assets gives you what's known as Working Capital, which indicates how much money the company has tied up in operating activities. Next, Long-Term Liabilities are loans of one sort or another, so the balance sheet shows Long-Term Debt and then Total Liabilities, which is just the sum of Current and Long-Term Liabilities. Owner's Equity, as we have seen, is the total of what shareholders have invested in the company over time, otherwise known as Contributed Capital, and what it has earned and retained in past years. This is called Retained Earnings. The final statement is the Cash Flow Statement. A Cash Flow Statement gives you a peek into a company's checking account. Like a bank account, it tells you how much cash was on hand at the beginning of a period and how much at the end. It also shows where the cash came from and how the company spent it. If you work for a large corporation, changes in the company's cash flow probably don't affect your daily work. Still, it's a good idea to stay up-to-date with the Cash Flow Statement and Projections because they may come into play when you prepare your budget for the coming year. If cash is tight, you will probably be asked to spend conservatively. If it's plentiful, you may have opportunities to make new investments. The same goes for small companies, of course, where cash is often very tight. Even if the company is profitable, owners may sometimes wonder whether they can make payroll. The Cash Flow Statements show how well your company is turning profits into cash. Accountability is ultimately what keeps the business solid. When we look at the net income from our amalgamated hat rack example, we were left with $347,500. On our Cash Flow Statement, from that amount, we might subtract operating activities. This can include accounts receivable, inventory, prepaid expenses, accounts payable, accrued expenses, income tax payable, and depreciation expenses. This gives us a total of $291,000. We then may need to factor in investing activities, the sale of a property, plant or equipment, and then capital expenditures. Here, let's imagine that we then have $200,000. This $200,000, we might even imagine, is a negative amount. Financing activities might form the last portion of our Cash Flow Statement. This is short-term debt decreases, long-term borrowing, capital stock, cash dividends to stockholders, cash flow from financing activities. Here, we might imagine a positive value ending somewhere at $166,000. Let's look at some of the key terms. The first big category is cash flow from operations. That just means that all cash the company took in or spent on ongoing operations, cash from customers, cash spent on wages and materials, and so on. The second big category is cash flow from investing activities. Investing in this context means money spent on assets such as machinery or vehicles and money realized in sale of such equipment. The third big category is cash flow from financing activities. This includes any cash received from a company's owners or shareholders or paid to its owners in the form of dividends. It also includes cash received from loans and cash paid to lenders. Add up all three major categories and you get the increase in cash during the year. Of course, for some companies, it might be a decrease, particularly if the company is growing fast and investing heavily in capital assets. This figure corresponds to the increase or decrease in cash in marketable securities that appear at the top of a two-year balance sheet comparison. Using the statements to measure financial health. Using the statements to measure financial health. The financial statements tell different but related stories about how well your company is doing financially. The income statement shows the bottom line. Using the rules of accounting, it indicates how much profit or loss a company generated over a period of time, a month, a quarter, or a year. The balance sheet shows whether a company is solvent. It provides a snapshot of the company's assets, liabilities, and equity on a given day. The cash flow statement shows how much cash a company is generating and also tracks in broad terms where that cash came from and what it's being used for. Now you're ready to take the next step. Interpreting the numbers these statements provide. For example, is the company's profit large or small? Is its level of debt healthy or unhealthy? You can answer such questions through ratio analysis. A financial ratio is just two numbers from the financial statements expressed in relation to each other. The ratios that follow are useful for almost any industry. But if you want to gauge your own company's performance, the most meaningful comparison is usually with other companies in the same industry. Profitability ratios. Profitability ratios help you evaluate a company's profitability by expressing its profit as a percentage of something else. These include return on sales or ROS, or net income divided by revenue, also known as net profit margin. ROS measures how much profit the company earns as a percentage of every sales dollar. For example, if a company makes a profit of $10 for every 100 in sales, the ROS is 10 over 100, or 10%. Return on assets, or ROA, or net income divided by total assets. You can find total assets on the balance sheet. ROA indicates how efficiently your company is using its assets to generate profit. Return on equity, ROE, or net income divided by owner's equity. ROE shows how much profit the company is generating as a percentage of the owner's investment. Gross profit margin, or gross profit divided by revenue. This ratio reflects the profitability of the company's products or services without considering overhead or other expenses. Earnings before interest and taxes margin, or EBIT, or operating profit divided by revenue. Many analysts use this indicator, also known as operating margin, to see how profitable a company's operating activities are. A profitability ratio that is headed in the wrong direction is usually a sign of trouble. Efficiency ratios. Efficiency ratios show how efficiently a company is managing its assets and liabilities. They include asset turnover, or revenue divided by total assets. The higher the number, the better a company is at employing assets to generate revenue. Days sales outstanding, or ending accounts receivable, from the balance sheet divided by revenue per day, annual revenue divided by 360. This ratio tells you how long, on average, it takes a company to collect what it's owed. A company that takes 45 days to collect its receivables needs significantly more working capital than one that takes 20 days to collect. Days payable outstanding, or ending accounts payable divided by cost of goods sold per day. This measure tells you how many days it takes a company to pay its suppliers. The more days it takes, the longer a company can use the cash. Of course, the desire for more cash has to be balanced against maintaining good relationships with suppliers. Inventory days, or average inventory divided by cost of goods sold per day. This ratio indicates how long it takes a company to sell the average amount of inventory on hand during a given period of time. The longer it takes, the more cash the company is tied up, and the greater the likelihood that the inventory will not be sold at full value. Again, it's often helpful to compare changes in these ratios from one period to the next and to track trends in the ratios over three years or more. Liquidity ratios. Liquidity ratios tell you about a company's ability to meet current financial obligations, such as debt payments, payroll, and vendor payments. They include current ratio, or current total assets divided by current total liabilities. This is a prime measure of a company's ability to pay its bills. It's so popular with lenders that it's sometimes called the banker's ratio. Generally speaking, a higher ratio indicates greater financial strength than a lower one. Quick ratio, or current assets minus inventory with the result divided by current liabilities. This ratio is sometimes called the asset test. It measures a company's ability to deal with its liabilities quickly without having to liquidate its inventory. Lenders aren't the only stakeholders who scrutinize liquidity ratios. Suppliers too are likely to inspect them before offering credit terms. Leverage ratios. Leverage ratios tell you how and how extensively a company relies on debt. The word leverage in this context means using debt to finance a business or an investment. Interest coverage, or earnings before interest and taxes, EBIT, divided by interest expense. This measures a company's margin of safety. It shows how many times over the company could make its interest payments from its operating profit. Debt to equity, or total liabilities divided by owner's equity. This shows how much a company has borrowed compared with the money its owners have invested. A high debt to equity ratio is sometimes a reason for concern. A company is said to be highly leveraged. Nearly every company borrows money at some point in its life. Like a household with a mortgage, a company can use its debt to finance investments that it would otherwise not be able to afford. The debt becomes a problem only when it's too high to be supported. Other ways to measure financial health. Other methods of assessing a company's financial health include valuation, economic value added, or EVA. In measurements of growth and productivity, like the ratios just discussed, these measures are most meaningful when they are comparing companies in the same industry or looking at one company's performance over time. Valuation usually refers to the process for determining value of the total company. The book value is simply the owner's equity figure on the balance sheet, but the market value of the business may be quite different. Publicly traded companies can measure their market value every day. They just multiply the daily stock price by the number of shares outstanding. A privately held company, or someone who is considering buying one, must estimate its market value. One method is to estimate future cash flows and then use some interest rates to determine how much that stream of cash is worth right now. A second method is to evaluate the company's assets, both physical and intangible, such as patents or customer lists. A third is to look at the market value of publicly traded companies that are similar to the company being evaluated. Of course, a company may be worth different amounts to different buyers. If your employer owns a unique technology, for instance, an acquirer that wants that technology for its operations may be willing to pay a premium for the business. Valuation also refers to the process by which Wall Street investors and stock analysts determine what a publicly traded company ought to be selling for, in their own view. Stocks and investors use various gauges in this process, including earnings per share, or EPS, or net income divided by the number of shares outstanding. This is the most commonly watched indicators of a company's financial performance. If it falls, it will likely take the stock price down with it. Price to earnings ratio, or PE, or the current price of a share of stock divided by the previous 12 months' earnings per share. Growth indicators, such as the increase in revenue, earnings, or earnings per share from one year to the next. A company that is growing will probably provide increasing returns to its shareholders over time. Economic value added, or EVA. A registered trademark of the consulting firm Stern Stewart EVA indicates a company's profitability after a charge for the cost of capital is deducted. Productivity measures. Sales per employee and net income per employee are two measures that link revenue and profit to workforce data. Trend lines in these numbers may suggest greater or lesser operating efficiency over time. Preparing a budget. Preparing a budget. A budget is a financial blueprint for achieving business goals. Your unit's budget is part of the company's overall strategy, so you need to understand the company's strategy in order to create a useful budget. Here are several steps you can take to increase your strategic understanding. Pay attention to communications from senior management. Watch the overall economic picture. Stay on top of industry trends. Deep yourself in company values. Conduct SWOT analyses. What are the company's strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats? Keep them in mind as you build your budget. All of these techniques should help you understand the context in which you'll develop your budget. Top-down versus bottom-up budgeting. In top-down budgeting, senior management sets specific goals for such items as net income, profit margins, and expenses. Each department may be told, for example, to limit expense increases to 6% above the previous year's levels. As you prepare your budget, observe such parameters and look at the company's overall plans for sales and marketing and for costs and expenses. Those objectives provide the framework within which you must operate. In bottom-up budgeting, managers aren't given specific targets. Instead, they put together budgets based on what they feel meet the strategic needs and goals of their respective departments. These budgets are rolled up into an overall company budget. The company budget is then adjusted with requests for changes sent back down to individual departments. This process can go through several iterations. Often it means working closely with departments that may be competing against yours for limited resources. It's good to be as cooperative as you can during the process, but don't hesitate to lobby aggressively for your own unit's needs. Getting started. Budgets should be ambitious but realistic. Don't map out a budget that you can't meet, but don't underestimate the possibilities. Here's how to begin. First, list three to five goals that you hope to achieve during the period for which you are budgeting. By way of example, we might say increasing gross sales by 5%, decreasing administrative costs as a percentage of revenue by three points, and reducing inventories by 2% by the end of the fiscal year. Make sure these goals line up with the organization's strategic priorities. Next, figure out how you're going to achieve them. How can you generate more revenue? Will you need more sales reps? Can you cut costs or reduce inventories? The smaller the unit you're focusing on, the more detail you'll need. If you're creating a budget for a 12-person sales office, you typically won't have to worry about capital expenditures such as major upgrades to the building, but you should include detailed estimates for travel costs, telephones and utilities, and office supplies. As you move up in the organization, the scope of your budget will broaden. You can assume that the head of a 12-person office has thought about printer cartridges, gasoline for the sales reps' cars. Your job now is to look at the big picture items such as computer systems and to determine how all the smaller scale budgets fit together. Other issues to consider when you're preparing a budget are term. Is the budget just for this year or is it for the next five years? Assumptions. At its simplest, a budget creates projections by adding assumptions to current data. Look hard at the assumptions that you are making. Role-playing can sometimes help here. Put yourself in the position of a division manager with limited resources and many requests for funding. Under those circumstances, would you persuade you to grant a request for two additional staff members? Articulate your assumptions. Usually, budgeters take the previous year's budget as a starting point. If you're the manager of Amalgamated Hat Rack's Moosehead division, for instance, you might look at the 2013 budget to get ideas about how to increase revenue, cut costs, or both. Don't look only at specific revenue or cost line items because revenue and costs are closely linked. Instead, ask yourself what the budget shows about last year's operations. Perhaps it would make sense to increase your sales projections for those products, particularly if your sales reps are optimistic about the prospect of more sales. Alternatively, you might plan to eliminate some products. Other questions to ask yourself. Will you keep prices the same, lower them, or raise them? A price increase of 3% might offset the budget's 2013 sales shortfall, provided that it doesn't dampen demand. Do you plan to enter new markets, target new customers, or use new sales strategies? How much additional revenue do you expect these efforts to bring in, and how much will these initiatives cost? Will your cost of goods change? For example, perhaps you plan to cut down on temporary help and add more full-time employees in the plant, or perhaps you hope to reduce wage costs through automation. If so, how much will it cost to automate? Are your suppliers likely to raise or lower prices? Are you planning to switch to lower-cost suppliers? Will quality suffer as a result? If so, how much will that affect your sales? Do you need to enhance your product to keep up with current customers? Does your staff need further training? Are you planning to pursue other special projects or initiatives? Articulating your answers to these questions can help ensure that your assumptions won't go unexamined. It can help you create budget numbers that are as realistic as possible. Quantifying your assumptions. Now you need to translate your assumptions and scenarios into dollar figures. Begin with last year's budget and make the changes that fit your plans. Because your budget must be compared and combined with others in the organization, your company will probably provide you with a standard set of line items. Once you've filled those in, take a step back. Does this budget meet your unit's goals? It's easy to overlook big-picture goals as you get into line-by-line details. Is your budget defensible? You may be perfectly happy with it, but you'll need to win over the budget committee. Once again, push your assumptions. Could you do with one extra staff member instead of two? If not, be sure you make a good argument as to why not. Calculating return on investments. Calculating return on investments. Let's imagine that a malgamated hat rack is considering two investment options, buying a new piece of machinery and creating a new product line. The new machine is a plastic extruder with a price tag of $100,000. Amalgamated hopes it will save time and money over the long term and it'll be safer than the current equipment. The current possibility, launching a line of coat racks, will require a $250,000 investment in design, production equipment, and marketing. How would amalgamated hat rack decide whether these opportunities make any economic sense? And if it can afford only one of them, how will it decide which to choose? By figuring out the return on investment, or ROI. This means evaluating how much money the investment will generate compared with its cost. Before you begin any ROI analysis, it's important to understand the costs and benefits of the status quo. You want to weigh the relative merits of each investment against the consequences, if any, of not proceeding with it. Don't assume that the costs of doing nothing are always high. Even if the new investment promises a significant benefit, it still carries risk. The short term cost and the short term risk of doing nothing is usually close to zero. Of course, the benefits, too, are close to zero. Cost and Benefits ROI calculations always involve the following steps. 1. Identify all the costs of the new purchase or business opportunity. 2. Estimate the savings to be realized. 3. Estimate how much cash the proposed investment will generate. 4. Map out a timeline for expected costs, savings, and cash flows, and use sensitivity analysis to challenge your assumptions. 5. Evaluate the unquantifiable costs and benefits. The first three steps here are fairly straightforward in theory, although they may be complicated in practice. When calculating the costs of an investment, you include upfront costs and also include the costs to be incurred in subsequent years, such as maintenance or upgrades. Savings may come from a variety of sources, such as through greater throughput per hour, higher quality and thus less rework, or a decrease in labor requirements. The cash generated simply comes from new sales. If you are calculating the ROI of a marketing campaign, for instance, you will need to estimate the campaign's effective effect on the company's revenue. It can be tricky to create a timeline for your costs, savings, and increased cash flow, so you may want to turn to your finance department for help with this. Step five is really just a check on the other four. Which costs or benefits can't you quantify, and how will they affect your decision? For example, would a particular investment help or harm your company's reputation in the community or with prospective clients? Once you've completed these steps, you are ready to use one or more of the analytical tools described in this chapter. Payback period, net present value, internal rate of return, break-even analysis, or sensitivity analysis. We'll look at the strengths and weaknesses of each tool to give you a better understanding. Payback period. The payback period tells you how long until you recoup your investment. To calculate it, divide the initial investment by the average anticipated cash flow or cost savings per year. For example, if a new plastic extruder will cost you $100,000 and save an amalgamated $18,000 a year, then the payback period is 5.56 years. Payback analysis is the simplest method for evaluating a prospective investment. It's useful mainly for ruling out options. If the extruder is likely only to last five years, for instance, it's obviously a bad investment because the payback period is longer than that. But payback analysis does not tell you the rate of return on investment, but also doesn't take into account the time value of money because it compares outlays today with cash coming in down the road. Net present value or internal rate of return. Net present value, or NPV, and internal rate of return, IRR, are highly valuable analytical tools, but they can be fairly complex. Because most calculators and spreadsheet programs can do the calculations for you, we'll describe these tools in broad terms. Consider the principle that underlies both methods, the time value of money. This principle states that a dollar you receive today is worth more than a dollar you expect to receive in the future. The reason? Even forgetting about inflation, you can spend or invest today's dollar right away. You can't do that with a future dollar. And every dollar you expect in the future comes with some degree of risk. For example, the person or institution that promised it to you may be unable to pay when the time comes. But you can't evaluate a new business opportunity without figuring out the value of the money you expect it to generate. So you need a method for expressing future dollars in terms of current dollars. That is what NPV and IRR calculations allow you to do. Suppose that Amalgamated expects a new line of coat racks to generate $60,000 in cash annually, beginning one year from now and continuing for five years. Here are the key questions to consider. Given this anticipated cash flow, the $250,000 net brunt cost, is a new line of coat racks the most profitable way to invest that $250,000? Or would Amalgamated be better off investing its money in the extruder or something else? Net present value. A net present value calculation discounts the anticipated $300,000 in cash flow to accurately express its value in today's dollars. How much should it be discounted? Companies usually establish a minimum rate of return or hurdle rate that they can reasonably expect to earn on their investments. The rate is always well above whatever they would earn on relatively low risk investments such as government bonds. Let's say that Amalgamated's chief financial officer has set the hurdle rate at 6%. So your initial outlay is $250,000. Expected return is $60,000 a year for five years, and the discount rate is 6%. If you punch those numbers into the NPV function on your calculator or spreadsheet, the program will give you the NPV. If it's a positive number, and if no other investments are under consideration, the company should pursue the investment. The NPV for a line of Amalgamated coat racks is $2,742, which suggests that it would be an attractive investment. But what about the other investment Amalgamated is considering, the $100,000 plastic extruder? At a discount rate of 6% and a savings of $18,000 a year for seven years, its NPV is about $483, which is just barely positive. When we compare NPVs for the two investments, we can see that both are positive, but the one for the coat racks is larger. If Amalgamated can afford only one of these, it should go with the new line of coat racks. The discount rate you use makes a big difference in NPV calculations. Suppose the rates were 10% instead of 6%. The NPV for the extruder would then be negative $12,368, turning a moderately attractive investment into a very poor one. Internal rate of return, IRR, is based on the same formula as NPV, with one difference. When calculating NPV, you know the desired rate of return, that's the discount rate, and you use it to determine how much money your future cash flows are worth today. With IRR, you essentially set the net present value at zero and solve the equation for the actual rate of return. Your spreadsheet program or calculator will often perform IRR calculations for you. If the IRR is greater than the company's hurdle rate, the investment is probably a good bet, though you still need to compare it with other options. What then is a reasonable rate of return for Amalgamated hat rack to expect on the new line of coat racks? According to the IRR calculations, it's 6.4%, which is slightly above the discount rate. This is a good investment, but again, it wouldn't be if the hurdle rate were 10%. Break even analysis. Break even analysis is useful when an investment you're considering will enable you to sell something new or sell more of something that you already offer. It tells you how much or how much more you need to sell in order to pay for the fixed investment. You need to sell in order to pay for the fixed investment, in other words, at what point you will break even. First, let's put the goal into more precise terms. We're going to determine the volume at which the incremental contribution from a product line equals the total cost of your investment. Contribution in this context means the revenue you get from each unit sold minus the unit's variable costs. Variable costs include the cost of materials and any direct labor involved in producing the units. Here are the steps. Subtract the variable cost per unit from the unit revenue. This is the unit contribution. Divide your total investment by the unit contribution. The quotient is the break even volume expressed as a number of units or additional units that must be sold to cover the cost of the investment. Suppose a new coat rack sells for $75 each and the variable cost per unit is $22. The figure break even calculation shows how to determine the break even volume for the coat racks. Here's an example of the breakdown calculation from figure five. If your unit revenue is $75 minus $22 in variable cost per units, your unit contribution is $53. The total investment required, 250,000, divided by the unit contribution of 53, leaves us with 4,717 coat racks as a break even volume. Questions to then ask, can it reasonably expect to sell more than 4717 units? If so, how quickly and what will it take to make that happen? Sensitivity analysis. As noted, Amalgamated expects its new line of coat racks to begin generating 60,000 annual revenue flow a year from now, but what if some variable in the scenario changed? How would it affect your evaluations of the investment opportunity? Sensitivity analysis enables you to see changes in your assumptions and what they might mean. Imagine that people within Amalgamated disagree about the prospects for the new line of coat racks. Sherman Peabody is the vice president of Amalgamated's Moosehead division. He would exercise day-to-day oversight of the new product line, and he is the one projecting $60,000 in annual cash flow for five years. Natasha Rubskaya, the company's CFO, is more doubtful about the investment, primarily because she believes that Peabody has drastically underestimated the market cost necessary to support the new line. He predicts an annual cash flow of only 45,000. Then there's Theodore Bullmoose, Amalgamated's senior vice president for new business development. Ever the optimist, he is convinced that the coat racks will practically sell themselves, generating an annual cash flow of 75,000 a year. So Amalgamated conducts a sensitivity analysis using the three scenarios. The NPV for Peabody's is 2742. For Rubskaya's, it's negative 60,444, and for Bullmoose's, it's 65,927. If Rubskaya is right, the coat racks won't be worth the investment. If either of the other two is right, the investment will pay off, and the reasonable amounts account according to Peabody's profit projections, and a generous amount according to Bullmoose's. Here is where the judgment comes into play. If Rubskaya has shown herself to be the most reliable estimator of the three, Amalgamated's CEO might accept her projection of the new line's potential. But whichever route the CFO, sorry, but whichever route the CEO takes, the sensitivity analysis provides a more nuanced view of the investments and how it would be affected by various changes in assumptions. Estimating unquantifiable costs and benefits. The numbers never tell the whole story, so your ROI analysis should acknowledge qualitative factors as well. Does the new opportunity fit with the company's mission? Can the management team take on a new product line without losing focus? At times, seemingly unquantifiable factors can at least be estimated numerically. You might come up with a ballpark dollar figure representing the value of employees' time saved, or you might also estimate the value of increased customer retention due to better understanding of purchase patterns. You may or may not decide to incorporate assessments into your ROI calculations, but they can be helpful when you make the case for investments. Tracking performance. Tracking performance. When you prepare a budget or decide on an investment, you can be certain of one thing. The numbers will not be exactly as you predicted. That's why you need to monitor your results. If they differ significantly from your projections, you can take corrective actions. If they are more or less on track, you can be confident that you are in control of the situation. Performance of an investment. When you evaluate a new investment, you're planning for the long term, typically a year or more. But if you track your projections monthly, you'll spot variations early. Consider Amalgamated's new coat rack division. The senior team ended up using Theodore Bullmoose's optimistic cash for a projection of $75,000 a year or $6,250 a month as the basis for its investment. In our hypothetical, we'll assume here that operating profit is equivalent to the cash flow projections used for NPE calculations. The division is doing reasonably well in revenue and the cost of goods sold. Its most significant negative variance is in the marketing expense line. It's difficult to be certain on the basis of figures from just the first month. Is this simply a one-time or seasonal variation? Or will Amalgamated have to spend more on marketing than anticipated? If your ROI varies from what you expected, and the pattern of unexpectedly high costs or unexpectedly low revenue seems likely to hold, it may be necessary to correct course. Amalgamated might decide to reduce its marketing outlay or might decide to keep spending at that level, recalculate the expected cash flow, and see whether the investment still makes sense. Since Bullmoose's projections was highly optimistic, the company has some wiggle room before it must conclude that it has made a bad investment. Performance of an existing unit. Tracking the budget for an established unit involves many of the same procedures. You monitor results so that you can make spending or operating adjustments as quickly as possible. If you suspect an aberration, don't be too concerned. The situation should straighten itself out. Just keep a close eye on that line item in subsequent months. If the variance is not an aberration, however, you will need to determine why it's occurring. Maybe expenses are higher than budgeted because sales have increased sharply, in which case expense overruns would be good news rather than bad. Alternatively, maybe you made a poor projection and must find some way to make up for the loss. Can you decrease spending on other line items to compensate for those that are over budget? Here's a tip. Enlist help with aberrations. Involve team members in addressing variances. They're likely to have some good ideas about what's going on and what to do about it. Forecasts. In addition to comparing your actual results to your budget, you'll sit down and update your projections with new information to create forecasts. But don't throw out the old estimates in the process. When budget time rolls around next year, you'll want to assess how accurate your original assumptions were. That will help you improve your estimates the next time around. If you are well off budget partway into the year and if your forecasts don't show a correction, let senior management know. Explain the reasons for the variances and how you propose to make up for them. That way, the senior team can adjust the overall company forecast and perhaps provide direction on whether and how to address the shortfalls. Test yourself. Test yourself. Below, you'll find 10 multiple-choice questions to help you assess your knowledge of finance and budgeting essentials. Answers appear after the test. Question number one. If you want to recognize the cost connected to a sale during the period when the sale was made, which accounting method would you use? A, accrual accounting, or B, cash-based accounting? Okay, I would say A, accrual accounting. The accrual accounting costs are matched to the associated sales regardless of whether cash is actually received or paid in that period. Number two. Which of the following would be considered part of cost of goods sold, or COGS? A, administrative employee salaries, B, sales and marketing costs, C, rents, D, labor costs from assembling the product, or E, advertising costs? D, labor costs from assembling the product. Three. In most accounting systems, short-term or current liabilities are those that must be paid in less than A, one month, B, three months, or C, one year? Yeah, the answer here should be C, one year short-term. Question four. If the income statement can tell you whether a company is making a profit, what does the cash flow statement tell you? A, how efficiently this company is using its assets, B, whether a company is turning profits into cash, or C, how well a company is managing its liabilities? Yeah, the answer here should be B, whether a company is turning profits into cash. Question five. Many analysts like to look at a ratio that shows how profitable a company's operating activities are. Which ratio shows this? A, our asset test ratio, B, accounts receivable, or C, EBIT margin? Yeah, the answer here should be EBIT margin. That's earnings before interest and taxes, often known as operating margin. Question six. At ABC Company, unit heads develop budgets for their departments that are linked to company performance objectives. Is this top-down or bottom-up budgeting? A, top-down, or B, bottom-up? I would say that is A, top-down budgeting. Question seven. As you begin to prepare your unit's budget, your manager reminds you to be aware of the scope of your budget. What does scope mean? A, the context of the proposed budget, the three to five goals, the aims to achieve. B, the part of the company the budget is supposed to cover and the level of detail it should include. Or C, whether the budget includes revenue and profits as well as operating costs for your units. Yeah, B, the part of the company the budget is supposed to cover and the level of detail it should include. Question eight. When you're analyzing ROI, payback period analysis can help you rule out bad investments. What is the main drawback of the payback period method? A, it ignores the value of time, value of money. B, it does not tell you how long it will take for the investment to break even. C, it can be used only to evaluate potential capital investments, not any other types of new business opportunities. Yeah, A, it ignores the time value of money. Nine. Your company is considering making an investment that could enable your division to sell more units of a new tracking software introduced last year. Your manager has asked you to determine how many units the company would need to sell to recoup this investment. Yeah, the answer here should be A, break-even analysis, because it tracks volume. Ten. To track your budget, you carry out three steps on a monthly basis. Step two is missing in the list below. What is it? Step one, assess monthly revenue and expense performance. Step two, blank. Step three, determine whether and how your budget will be used. Step four, determine how your budget will be used. Step five, assess monthly revenue and expense performance. Step two, blank. Step three, determine whether and how your bottom line will be affected by any variances. Options are A, assess your company's capital expenditures. B, revise your forecast for the coming quarter. C, determine positive and negative variances compared to the budget. Yeah, the answer here should be C. So in total, the steps to track your budget on a monthly basis should include step one, assess monthly revenue and expense performance. Step two, determine positive and negative variances compared to the budget. Step three, determine whether and how your bottom line will be affected by any variances. Key terms from this book. Accounts payable, or AP. Money owed by a company to suppliers. Accounts receivable, AR. Money owed to a company for goods or services sold. Accrual. An amount incurred as an expense in a given accounting period but not paid by the end of that period. Accrual accounting. An accounting method whereby revenue and expenses are booked when they are incurred regardless of when they are actually received or paid. Revenues recognized in the time period when the goods or services are delivered. Expenses are recognized in the same period as their associated revenues. Acid test ratio. C, quick ratio. Allocation. The process of dividing costs in a certain category among several cost centers, typically on the basis of usage. For example, corporate overheads such as rent and utilities may be allocated to departments according to the number of square feet they occupy. Amortization. A charge on the income statement reflecting a portion of the cost of an intangible asset such as a patent. Assets. The economic resources of a company. These can include cash, accounts receivable, inventories, land, buildings, vehicles, machinery, equipment, and other investments. Asset turnover. A measure of how effectively a company uses its assets. To calculate, divide sales by assets. In general, the higher the number, the better. Balance sheet. A document summarizing the company's financial position, its assets, liabilities, and owner's equity at a specific point in time according to the fundamental equation of the balance sheet. A company's assets equal its liabilities plus owner's equity. Banker's ratio. The current ratio. Book value. The value at which an asset is carried on a balance sheet. The book value of a new asset is its purchase price, but that figure is reduced each year by depreciation. So the asset's book value at any point in time is its cost minus accumulated depreciation. Bottom-up budgeting. Bottom-up budgeting. A process whereby managers put together budgets that they feel would best meet the needs and goals of their respective departments or units. These budgets are rolled up to create an overall company budget which is then adjusted with requests for changes being sent back down. Break-even. The volume at which the total contribution from a product line equals the total fixed costs. To calculate it, subtract the variable cost per unit from the selling price to determine the unit contribution. Then divide total fixed costs by the unit contribution. Break-even on an investment is the point when the net cash will recede from the investment equals its cost. Capital expenditure or capital investment. Payment to acquire or improve a capital asset. Cash-based accounting. The recording of revenue and expenses when cash actually changes hands. This approach is seldom used except by very small companies. Cash flow statement. A statement showing where the company's cash comes from and where it goes. Contributed capital. Capital funds received in exchange for stock. Contribution. In product cost analysis, unit revenue minus variable cost per unit. The sum of money available to contribute to fixed costs. Cost of capital. The percentage rate a company must pay investors or lenders in return for its capital funding. Companies calculate their weighted average cost of capital by taking into account factors such as the average interest rate on their debt, the expected rate of return on their equity, and their tax rate. Cost of goods sold. COGS. Costs directly associated with making a product. Cost of services or COS. Costs directly associated with delivering a service. Current assets. Those assets that are most easily converted into cash including cash on hand, accounts receivable, and inventory. Current ratio. A comparison of a company's current assets with its current liabilities. To calculate, divide total current assets by total current liabilities. Days payable outstanding. A measure indicating how long it takes on average for a company to collect its receivables. To calculate, divide accounts receivable by revenue per day. Debt. Money owed to a creditor. Debt-to-equity ratio. A comparison of a company's outstanding loans to its owner's equity. To calculate debt-to-equity ratio, divide total current assets by total current liabilities. Divide total liabilities by owner's equity. Depreciation. A charge on the income statement representing a portion of the cost of a tangible asset such as a building or machine. The cost of such assets is charged over their estimated useful life. Direct costs. Costs directly attributable to the manufacturer of a product or the delivery of a service. For example, the cost of plastic as a payment usually issued quarterly to the stockholders of a company as a return on their investment. Earnings before interest and taxes or EBIT. Earnings per share. A company's net income divided by the number of shares outstanding is one of the most common indicators of a public company's financial performance. Earnings statement. Economic value added to a company's capital. Efficiency ratios. Financial measures that link various income statement and balance sheet figures to gauge a company's operating efficiency. Examples include asset turnover, days sales outstanding, days payable outstanding, and inventory days. Equity. The value of a company's assets minus its liabilities. On a balance sheet, equity is referred to as debt. A company that has a high debt-to-equity ratio by industry standards is said to be highly leveraged. Financial statements. Reports of a company's financial performance. The three fundamental statements are the income statement, the balance sheet, and the cash flow statement. They present related information that provide different perspectives on a company. Fixed assets. Assets that are difficult to convert to cash such as building and equipment. Fixed costs. Costs that remain constant in the short run regardless of sales volume. They include administrative salaries, interest, rent, and insurance. Generally accepted accounting principles Gross margin. Gross profit as a percentage of revenue. Gross profit, the sum remaining when COGS is subtracted from revenue. Growth, an increase in a company's revenue, profits, or owner's equity. Hurdle rate, a company's minimum required rate of return on its investments. A statement of operations and a statement of earnings. Indirect costs. Costs are not directly attributable to the manufacture of a product or a provision of a service. Interest coverage, an indicator of a company's margin of safety on its interest costs, specifically how many times over the company can make its interest payments out of current operating profits. To calculate interest coverage, divide EBIT by interest expense. The rate at which the net present value or NPV of an investment equals zero. Inventory, material that will eventually be fabricated and or sold. Examples include the merchandise in the shop, finished goods in the warehouse, work in progress, and raw materials. Inventory days, a measure of how long it takes a company to sell a product. Invoice, a bill submitted to a purchaser for goods or services rendered. Leverage ratios, ratios related to a company's use of debt. They include interest coverage and debt to equity and help people assess a company's ability to pay what it owes. Liabilities, the financial claims against a company's resources, including accounts payable, the net present value or NPV, the estimated current value of an investment calculated by subtracting the cost of the investment from the present value of the investment's future earnings. Net profit margin, C, return on sales. Operating cash flow, OCF, the net movement of cash from the operation side of the business as opposed to cash related to sales, for example, administrative salaries, rents, and sales and marketing costs. Operating profit, the sum remaining after all operating costs are subtracted from revenue, also known as earnings before interest in taxes or EBIT. Owner's equity, C, equity. Payback period, the length of time needed for a company to pay a company. The ratio comparing the market's valuation of a company to the value of that company as indicated by its owner's equity. Price-to-earnings ratio, or PE, the current price of a share of stock divided by the previous 12 months earnings per share. This is the basic level of profitability in which profits are expressed as a percentage of various other items. Examples include return on assets, return on equity, return on sales. Property, plants, and equipment, PPE, a line on the balance sheet indicating how much money after depreciation a company has invested in fixed assets such as buildings and machinery. Quick ratio, a measure of a company's ability to meet its short-term obligations, also known as receivables and marketable securities by current liabilities. Ratio analysis, a means of analyzing the information contained in the three financial statements. A financial ratio is two key numbers from a company's financial statements expressed in relation to each other. Retained earnings, all after-tax income held by a business and not paid out in dividends since its inception. Return on assets, ROA, a measure of the productivity of a company's assets. To calculate ROA, divide net income by total assets. Return on equity, ROE, a measure of the productivity of a company's equity, also known as return on owner's equity. To calculate ROE, divide net income by owner's equity. Return on sales, ROS, a measure of a company's overall efficiency in generating profits, also known as net profit margin. To calculate ROS, divide net income by total sales. Revenue, the first line on an income statement indicating the value of goods or services delivered to customers during the period of time covered by the statement, also called sales. Sales, an exchange of goods and services for money, the revenue. Shareholder's equity, the equity. Slot analysis, an analysis of a company's strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats. The principle that a dollar received today is worth more than a dollar expected at some point in the future. Top-down budgeting, a process whereby senior management sets specific objectives for items such as net income, profit margin, and expenses. Unit managers then put together the budgets within these parameters. Valuation, an estimate of a company's value for the purposes of purchase, sale, or investment. Costs, costs that vary according to sales volume such as the cost of materials and sales commission. Working capital, a measure of the company's day-to-day liquidity. Working capital equals the difference between a company's current assets and its current liabilities.