Managing up. What is managing up? Managing up when done right isn't political maneuvering, cozying up to the boss or outright manipulation. Yes, it's a delicate business, but it doesn't need to be about power plays. Managing up is simply bringing a conscientious approach to working with your supervisor towards goals you both care about. The aim here is a mutually beneficial relationship. What managing up involves. The skills required include knowing yourself and your manager well. Managing expectations on both sides. Listening with a keen ear. Communicating in a clear, authentic voice. Negotiating with diplomacy. Monitoring the relationship as it progresses and making necessary refinements. Why managing up is useful. Managing up helps you obtain the resources and buy-in you need to do your best work for your boss and your company. You, your manager, and your organization are interdependent. Only by recognizing that fact can you cultivate a strong, trusting relationship that allows you to get things your manager's preference can lead to misunderstanding about your skills and your dedication to your work. Tuning in to your manager is only part of what it takes to avoid problems. You must also know yourself and navigate the difference between the two of you. Knowing your manager and yourself. Knowing your manager and yourself. Managing up is a constant process. It takes observation and a willingness to adjust behavior on a daily basis. Once you have a trusting relationship on a solid foundation, cultivating it becomes much easier and less time intensive. Roles. You and your boss have a web of complex relationships to maintain and responsibilities to fulfill. Acknowledging these realities can help you see the world from your boss's point of view. Understand your manager's priorities and pressures. Map them against your own. Locate the points of overlap and those of potential conflict. Perhaps even marking them on an organizational chart. The visual evidence can expose hidden risks and opportunities in collaborating with your manager. For example, look for chances to support your boss in work she's doing for her own manager. Ask how you can help and suggest ideas of your own. Of course, differences in power can make some subordinates, especially those who are themselves managers, react in unhealthy ways. Management experts John Gabbaro and John Cotter highlight two problematic responses to a boss's authority. Counter-dependency. Counter-dependency is when you unconsciously present your boss, perhaps even see them as an institutional enemy. Counter-dependent subordinates might start arguments, especially with authoritarian bosses, just for the sake of fighting. Dependency. Dependency is when you swallow objections or anger and comply, even when your boss makes a poor decision. Dependent subordinates stew rather than express honest opinions. If you recognize a bit of yourself in either of these two profiles, consider how your natural reaction to authority in general may be damaging the relationship with your boss. Strengths and weaknesses. Knowing your manager's strengths can help you appreciate how she's using those strengths to support the team and the company goals. Observe your boss as they pursue objectives and interact with others. You can get valuable insights about their strengths by talking with their co-workers who know them better. This is a great way to get an insight into your boss's strengths. List your strengths alongside your manager's strengths. Note the similarities and differences. Points of overlap. Differences needn't be seen as problems. They can signal opportunities to complement your manager. This is a great way to get an insight into your boss's strengths. Observe your boss as they pursue objectives and interact with others. You can get valuable insights about their strengths by talking with their co-workers can signal opportunities to complement your manager. Rather than being frustrated by your boss's shortcomings or even thwarted by them, think of recognizing their weaknesses as an important step towards achieving your common goals. Figure out where your manager needs assistance and step up to offer it. If your manager has a tough time meeting deadlines, identify the obstacles that could be standing in the way. Offer to tackle those tasks if they're in your purview. Zero in on your own weaknesses as well. To develop an effective partnership, you need to know when to lean on your manager, not just when they can lean on you. If your weaknesses and theirs overlap in some areas, those may be points of friendly commiseration on an emotional level. On a practical level, they may reveal where the two of you need outside support. Ask your manager how she likes and does not like to operate. It's important to know her general preferences and to scope out specifics. Your boss may not think to articulate these preferences, but chances are she won't mind answering a few thoughtful questions about how she likes to work. Some questions that you may choose to ask. Question one, do you prefer formal or informal delivery of information? Question number two, how do you like to process information? Question number three, how would you describe your management style? Question four, how do you address problems and conflicts? Motivators. At every employee's core, from entry-level worker to CEO, there are things that drive her to do good work. Identifying what motivates your boss is a key component of managing up. Sometimes it's easy, but other times, motivators run deeper. Perhaps your manager is a big-picture person, inspired by vision, and prefers to leave details to team members like you. In that case, don't dive into minutiae when you give updates. Some of what you've done explicitly states how it supports the overall goals. In contrast, if your manager creates specifics, choose an illustrative example as a cross-section of your work. During check-ins with your manager, talk about what motivates you. That equips them to make engaging assignments and connect you with people in the network who will inspire you. Report back to your manager when you find a specific project exciting. This makes it easier for her to give you the kind of work that makes you tick. Managing expectations. Managing expectations. Managing expectations. Know what your manager expects. Your boss will want you to fulfill your key responsibilities, meet her standards for performance, and achieve objective measures of success. You can't do any of that unless you understand how she defines those responsibilities and standards, and which metrics she'll use to gauge your progress. Ask her to describe what she's looking for in your work. If she doesn't articulate expectations clearly, try writing them up and sharing that informal document with her to make sure that you've captured them accurately. You'll want to revisit those expectations periodically in case they change. Most managers expect some combination of these behaviors from direct reports. Offer ideas. Make creative suggestions for innovation or improvement. Manage your own direct reports competently. Coordinate their efforts, foster camaraderie, write useful and specific performance reviews. Step in when one falls behind. Manage crises with skills and patience. Collaborate with peers. Work collegially with others towards your manager's goals. Overcome differences with co-workers who may be just like one another. Lead initiatives. Raise your hands for cross-national projects, particularly those that involve implementing new ideas. Stay current. Keep an abreast of industry standards, marketplace developments, advances in tech. Bring in your insights to bear on your work. Drive your own growth. Seek out professional development opportunities. This can mean taking classes, pursuing a degree, but it doesn't have to. You might simply expose yourself to new ideas and people or accept challenging assignments that enhance the value you add to your team. Be a player for all seasons. Stay positive even during the hard times. That will inspire and motivate your direct reports, your peers, and your manager. Managers differ in how much value they place on each of these aforementioned behaviors. Tailor your emphasis according to your boss's expectations and work style. Set your own expectations. To meet your manager's expectations, you must set your own sights ambitiously and realistically. That means identifying and sharing you or your direct report's needs for direction and resources, as well as respecting your manager's limits and fulfilling those requests. Set realistic expectations for those who can help you meet your boss's goals. Your direct reports, managers in other departments, customers, suppliers, independent contractors, and others inside or outside the organization. When collaborating with others in your sphere of influence, ask yourself these questions. How do they perceive my manager and the work I'm doing for her? Which of my manager's goals can they help me meet? What's the most effective way to communicate those goals to them? How can I best persuade them to help? What problems can I help them solve in return? You won't have formal authority over most people around you, just as you don't have authority over your manager. So you can use some of those techniques to manage out that you've used to manage up. That is offering ideas and solutions, providing feedback, and sharing reactions and perspectives. Understanding the limits of managing out. Given that you can't control every outcome, and given that you can't always find common ground, you'll be the one who often has to give. The better you get at managing up, the more often you'll agree with your boss, and the less vexing compromises will seem when you don't. Keep these basic limitations in mind. I can influence my manager, but ultimately, I'm not in charge. My own goals are important, but my boss's takes precedence. My manager sets more expectations for me than I do for her. I have more to prove to my boss than she has to prove to me. Reading that list may make you feel like you won a side, but two things should comfort you. First, the list is short, so the possibilities far exceed the limits. And second, you can greatly expand the possibilities by skillfully managing out. Communicating with your manager. Communicating with your manager. Effective communication takes a deft touch when you're managing up. If your attempts to persuade are too obvious, they may not succeed. Yet, you need to be deliberate in your approach. How to listen and observe. As you engage with your boss day to day, identify the messages behind the speech and behavior. The words and deeds matter, of course, but it's the values that underlie them that often mean more. Listen with a keen ear and observe with a sharp eye. Interaction. Whatever your manager's preferred style of interaction, you'll want to do a little investigating to figure it out. Start by asking yourself the following questions. Is my manager a listener or a reader? Listeners want to hear information first and read about it later. Readers prefer to see it written down first before discussing it with you. Does she prefer detailed facts and figures or just an overview? If she thrives on details, focus primarily on accuracy and completeness. If she prefers an overview, emphasize the clarity and crispness of the main idea. How often does she want to receive information? Your manager may always want to receive updates at specified junctures or she may have different thresholds for each project, such as daily reporting on critical endeavors and periodic updates on secondary initiatives. How to present problems and opportunities. Number one, describe the impact in clear terms. Endpoint how it affects your work and your organization's performance. If presenting an opportunity, outline the potential benefits. Explain how solving this problem or seizing this opportunity will help you and your manager achieve your shared goals. Number two, identify your solution or approach. Recommend a specific action plan, but also present other options. Outline the pros and cons of each possibility. Explain why you think it's Outline the pros and cons of each possibility. Explain why you favor the one that you do. Number three, flush out the implications. Do your best to identify everyone who has a stake in the matter. If you've tested your solution or approach on a small scale, present the results and what you've learned from them. Number four, fine-tune your plan. Engage your manager in developing a final action plan to increase the likelihood of smooth implementation. Doing so demonstrates your commitment to ensuring success. How to disagree with your manager. When you communicate with your manager, you're looking for common ground. If you don't find it, however, it's important not to panic or retreat. You may think that disagreeing with her will make her perceive you negatively or trigger a defensive reaction, but managers want to make better informed decisions, so they often seek other perspectives. Indeed, most of them report, but they don't hear enough alternative points of view. Disagree constructively with your manager. Show respect and understanding. Demonstrate that you care about achieving the best results for the organization. Here are some ways that you might do that. Link your idea directly with your managers and your organization's goals. Provide suggestions that your manager can act on, not just objections. You could say something like, how about contacting others in the industry who have used the system to see if you're, if they're having the same problems? Would you like me to drop a list of people to call and schedule some time with them? Explain how your idea can prevent pitfalls. Identify those pitfalls in precise terms. Present supporting data to show that your proposal is fact-based rather than emotional. Offer a range of options. Binary choices are likely to meet resistance. Suggesting a few possibilities signal your flexibility and invites your manager to respond in kind. Give verbal and non-verbal feedback. Use phrases such as, I see, or I know what you mean. Avoid hot-button language. If, for example, your boss always recoils when someone describes an approach as a best practice or the next big thing, find other ways to express yourself. Reflect your manager's concerns as you speak. For instance, I understand that you're worried about how this new plan will work, and I was initially concerned about that too, but when I did some research, I realized something important. Moments of disagreement are usually a bit uneasy, but a trusting relationship with the boss allows room for them. Negotiating with your manager. Negotiating with your boss is an art. You're persuading someone in authority to see things from your perspective and then take action. Negotiations may focus on tasks such as overseeing projects, securing resources, winning assignments, or getting buy-in or approval for new ideas. Or they may concern issues of personal satisfaction, such as work balance or flexible scheduling. Either way, you'll need to establish your credibility, identify the priorities, communicate strategically. Establishing your credibility. Negotiations are most effective when the other party respects your judgment. Here are some tips for earning your manager's trust in a negotiation. Be sincere. Highlight your track record. Welcome suggestions. Put your boss's interests first. Be candid. To establish your expertise, present your research. Gain firsthand experience. Cite trusted resources. Offer proof of concept. Identify priorities. Identify priorities is important so that you have a clear sense of what tasks to accomplish in what order and when. Certainly manage your time as independently as you can, but when you deviate from an established routine, you may have to renegotiate due dates, time allotments, and related details with your boss. Negotiate with your manager about work priorities. Show that you are aware of all the projects for which you're responsible. Specify clearly what you can and cannot do in the time that you have. Ask for help setting deadlines for new work to avoid slowing down other projects. Follow up with an email to seal the deal. Your manager understands the importance of priorities. After all, as a manager, she must reassess them all the time. Showing her that you, too, can think ahead will facilitate your negotiations because she'll see that you know where she's coming from. Communicate strategically. In negotiation, persuasion is paramount, so the way you package your message is as important as the message itself. Here are a few pointers. Avoid you-centered language. Instead, use words like I, we, or both. Take a win-win approach. Indicate how your ideas will benefit your manager and the organization, not just you. Collaborate. Don't just dump a problem on your manager and ask her what to do about it. Offer to set up a meeting so you can think through it together. When negotiating with your manager, don't think of it as arguing for something you want. Instead, do it as a searching for a solution that works for both of you. Again, the aim is not tit-for-tat compromise. It's a mutual benefit. Monitoring the Relationship Never take the relationship for granted. Like any significant connection between two people, it requires nurturing and periodic reflection. Assess the strengths and weaknesses of your relationship with your boss every few months by revisiting these ten questions. Have I taken the primary responsibility for managing my relationship with my boss? 2. Am I aware of my manager's expectations for me? Are they realistic? 3. Is my manager aware of what resources I need to meet those expectations? 4. How much does my boss know about what I've been doing for the past few months? If she doesn't know, how can I correct that? 5. Am I reliably meeting my commitments? If not, how can I rectify shortcomings? 6. How well do my manager and I get along on a daily basis? Do we need to address any conflicts? 7. Do our oral and written interactions occur with ease? If not, how can I make our communications more seamless? 8. Do we trust each other? What can I do to increase that level of trust? 9. Do I back up my boss when I talk to others about her and execute her roles? 10. What can I do to support my manager more effectively?