Managing time. Why manage your time? If you ask yourself, why do I never seem to have enough time to get everything done? You probably have a lot going on, you say. There are your daily tasks, and the big projects that your boss has put on your plate, not to mention new skills that you want to learn, and bigger goals that you'd like to accomplish. You're juggling a wide range of tasks, responsibilities, projects, and deadlines. You're swamped, and you're not sure if you can pull it all off. There's too much to do in too little time. There are only so many hours in a workweek, after all. When time is scarce and progress is slow, it can be overwhelming. Sometimes you can't get everything done, and you miss a deadline and let a project fall away unfinished. But there's nothing you can do about it, right? Wrong. Whether you're new to work, or a veteran coping with a longstanding time management issue, you can learn to prioritize, to plan, to be more efficient, and to align your schedules with your goals. The super organizational impulse not to be coded into your DNA? The super organizational impulse need not be coded into your DNA. Time management is a skill that you can learn and continue to fine-tune with practice. You just have to be disciplined. There isn't a one-size-fits-all approach. We all have different schedules, responsibilities, and personalities, but there are some best practices. This book will walk you through some of the basics. You're going to learn how to do the following. Assess how well you're spending your time now. Uncovering the hidden time sinks in your day. Clarifying your goals so that you can make sure to work towards them. To reallocate your time to prioritize the work and goals that are important to you and your organization. To overcome the obstacles that keep you from doing the work that you should be doing. Assess yourself. Assess yourself. The first step to effective time management is self-awareness. You probably have a general sense of what you do on a daily basis and how much time you spend, but perception isn't always reality. You may overestimate or underestimate. These miscalculations can add up and leave you with an incomplete picture of where your time goes. This is why it's important to actually track your time. For a week or two, keep a log of the tasks that you perform and how much time you spend working on each. Yes, it's true that time tracking can feel like busy works, but the minutes you spend on it can be kept to a minimum. It's the best way to get a clear and detailed account of how you've spent and wasted your time. State your objectives. Before you begin tracking your activities, identify the reason that you're going through this exercise. What do you want to accomplish by being better at managing your time? This question may seem too simple to spend much time on, but it's important because your answer will inform your efforts and your goals. If you know where you want to go, it's a lot easier to figure out how to get there. Break down your responsibilities. You want to make the time-tracking process as simple, painless, and manageable as possible. To do this, break down your job duties into broad categories. For example, personal growth, employee management, core responsibilities, administrative, and management. You want to make the time-tracking process as simple, painless, and manageable as possible. To do this, break down your job duties into broad categories. For example, personal growth, employee management, core responsibilities, administrative work. And track the amount of time that you spend each day doing tasks in each category. It's easier and more efficient than logging every single task that you spend time on. There are other ways to break down your duties, such as if you work in a deadline-intensive environment, for example. You might break down your workload into short-term, long-term, and urgent tasks. Or, by priority level, high, medium, low. Here are some typical categories that you may wish to track. Core responsibilities. These are the day-to-day tasks that make up the crux of your job. Personal growth. This category consists of the activities and projects that you find valuable, meaningful, and fulfilling, but may not be part of your everyday responsibilities. Managing people. Do you have any direct reports? Do you work collaboratively with colleagues? Do you lead a team? If so, the amount of time that you spend managing people, that team, your colleagues, and your superiors, can be logged here. Administrative tasks. These are the necessary chores you perform each day. Emails, timesheets, expense reports. Crises and fires. Interruptions. Urgent matters. Unplanned meetings. Last-minute issues that need to be dealt with right away can sabotage even the best time management plans. That's why they're particularly critical to track. Free time. This may not be an official part of your duties, but everyone needs to take breaks from work. Lunch, a walk, a coffee pit stop, a chat with a co-worker, personal email, the internet. In small doses, these can unclutter your mind and even increase collaboration and productivity. Track your time. Once you have your categories in place, you can build your time tracking tool. At the start of the workweek, create a time chart. Devote a row for each day of the week and a column for each broad category. Just after you complete a task, write down how long it took you to finish it. If you spent an hour on Tuesday morning responding to emails, record that in the administrative task column and so on. At the end of each day, take five minutes or so to tally the amount of time that you spent on each activity. Do the same at the end of the week as well. Next, calculate the percentage of your workweek that you spent on each activity. Finally, visualize the results by creating a pie chart. Examine your results. As you go, be on the lookout for patterns and habits. Identifying these is the entire point of the exercise. Most likely, your results don't align with the objectives you outlined initially. Recognizing patterns large and small will inform the kinds of changes you make and how you spend your time. Unearthing these issues means that you know where to shift your priorities and where to make improvements. Now you know how to make improvements. You can also use the time chart to help you understand where to shift your priorities and where to make improvements. Unearthing these issues means that you know where to shift your priorities and where to make improvements. Now you need a plan to help make that happen. Develop a plan. In the next stage, the planning stage, you'll take what you learned from time tracking and develop a plan that you need to spend your time more wisely on in the future. Reclaim your time. Now that you have a good idea of which kinds of work are taking the most and the least of your time, and a general sense of how these realities measure up against goals you've set, the next step is to find more time to spend on your highest priority activities. Start by thinking about what tasks you'll need to perform in order to reach your goal. You'll probably want to interact more often with your eight direct reports. One way to do this is to schedule weekly half-hour check-ins with each of them for a total of four hours. Create a big-picture vision. The next step is to apply the process of reallocating time more broadly to your other job categories. This will require some prioritization of your tasks. You're going to also put some interim goals in place to ensure your success. This may seem like an overkill, especially if redistributing your time to your highest priority activity was a straightforward process, but it's worth the effort. Because it's rare that your top priority category is the only one that you need to attend to. To recap, here's how to do it. Prioritize. Allocate time. Establish interim goals. Identify key tasks. Do a reality check. Your goals and time allotments may seem reasonable on paper. But once you get into the flow of the workweek, you may find that they're unrealistic. Depending on what you discover, as you observe, iterate and tweak your time allotments. Adjust your goals, or both. Don't worry, this is par for the course. Start at the bottom of your list with your low-value tasks and see if you can scale down your goals. The more realistic, reasonable, and attainable your plan is, the more successful you'll be at managing your time. Execute your plan. Timeboxing. Execute your plan. Timeboxing. When putting your plan into action and sticking to it, you're going to be using a tool called Timeboxing. Timeboxing Basics. Timeboxing is a planning tool that's a cross between a calendar and a to-do list. It involves breaking down your schedule into a number of small time periods, say half-hour, hour-long, two-hour-long chunks, then slotting tasks into each chunk. It's like scheduling meetings with yourself. Set the agenda, set the time, and show up on time prepared to work. One of the benefits of Timeboxing, other than forcing you to be realistic about what work you can accomplish when and making sure you have the time to do it, is that it helps you group similar tasks so you can take advantage of any efficiencies. Timeboxing prevents that kind of randomness that can otherwise creep in. Instead, it brings the following. Accountability. Efficiency. Time awareness. Healthy pressure. Focus. Effectiveness. You can adapt Timeboxing to your needs and preferences. If there's your job and a lot of moving parts, then you may find you want to plan for every task, activity, and project. If your schedule is relatively stable, you may choose to use it just for specific categories of work, say to block out time for administrative tasks. Setting up your Timeboxes. Here's how to create your Timeboxing system. Number one, review your week. One day a week, say Friday afternoon or Monday morning, review the week ahead, deadlines, commitments, meetings, tasks. Take an inventory of everything that you need to accomplish. Number two, prioritize the items on the list. Put the deadline-sensitive tasks first, your goal-oriented tasks second, and then schedule around these recurring tasks and obligations. This step is the most important, so give it the attention that it wants. Number three, estimate time for tasks. If you're new to Timeboxing, it's a good idea to err on the side of caution. It's much better to overestimate than underestimate, so include some slack time in your calculations. Number four, slot Timeboxes in your calendar. Create a series of Timeboxes, spreading them throughout your calendar. You can enter them directly into your calendaring software or first sketch them out on a piece of paper. You'll want to end up making a note of them wherever you keep track of your appointments, so treat them with the same degree of rigor. Number five, review your estimates. Always keep track of the accuracy of your time estimates after the fact. Note the tasks that you finished and the ones that you didn't. This will help you make better estimates in the future. How to prioritize tasks. When setting a daily schedule, one of the critical questions to ask is, which task should I do when? Many of us skip thinking through this. We spend more time than we should on things that matter far less. Sometimes we choose one task over another because it's easier or because it gives us instant gratification, even though we have more important work to do. Or we work on all of our big projects and let the smaller tasks slip through the cracks. We aren't always doing this deliberately. On a daily basis, we face hundreds if not thousands of choices, and it's difficult to keep the big picture in mind at all times. Developing a system to prioritize your tasks will simplify your decision-making process and encourage you to make better decisions on a more consistent basis. The following two-by-two matrix, popularized by productivity expert Stephen Covey, will help you prioritize your tasks based on the importance and urgency. When examining an item on your to-do list or assessing any tasks that you've just been assigned, decide if it's urgent, that is, does it need to be done soon, or not urgent, and whether it's important, i.e., will have a big impact, or unimportant, and then apply these pre-established rules. Number one, urgent and important. These are the crises and deadlines that you have to deal with throughout the course of the week. This is a problem with the product that you oversee, the website that you maintain, or big client that you handle. These should always be your highest priority. Not urgent, but important. This quadrant consists of tasks that have a high impact on you or your organization, but they aren't necessarily time-sensitive. These tasks are likely to be related to your long-term goals. Since they're not urgent, we often fail to devote enough time to them. That's why you should make them your second priority. Three, urgent, but less important. These tasks need to be done quickly, but they have a lower impact if they're not done at all, or if they're late. When considering whether something is less important, weigh not only its potential impact on you, but on your group and organization as well. These should be your third priority. Finally, four, not urgent and less important. The name says it all. These should be your last priority. By using this matrix, you can help guide your schedule. You're going to be more likely to do the right work at the right time. But remember that time-boxing is an iterative process. It's not always going to be perfect. Your estimates will be off sometimes, and your schedule may change more quickly. Dramatically than you'd like. The more seriously you take the time you set aside for your work and priorities you set, the more realistic your schedule will be. The more likely that will be that you can get the most important and urgent work done. Keep yourself on track. Keep yourself on track. Good time management is based on preparation. Once you establish the goals and you set the priorities and you've developed your plan, it'll be easier to stick with it. But, as you can imagine, even if you invest the time and preparation, it won't always be easy. There will be roadblocks along the way, and you may fall back into old habits. Common weak spots and challenges that cause us to deviate from well-intentioned plans include deadlines, proclivity for procrastination, and interruptions, including emails and meetings. Manage these well, and you'll be on your way to staying on track. Manage your deadlines. Deadlines for big projects can be daunting. This is especially true if you have a lot of other work on your plates. Your schedule, your colleagues, and your project may suffer if you don't manage your deadline well. If you fail to set aside adequate time to complete a project and the deadline is approaching in a fast clip, you'll have to drop everything all at once. The project, whether you like it or not, is the most urgent and important task. And suddenly, the most urgent and important task for others involved in the project can depend on you. Here's how to make deadlines doable. Plan from the beginning. When you're first given a deadline, always take the time to estimate how long the work will really take you to complete. Think about how you will do it. Will you break it up into pieces? Are there logical stages? Perhaps some that depend on other contributions or feedback. Once you understand all the tasks involved and have estimated how long they will take, work backwards from the due date and set yourself smaller deadlines along the way. Sequence big to small. If you can, it's also helpful to sequence your project so that each successive subtask is shorter and easier than the last. That is, start with the most difficult and time-sensitive tasks and end with the least. Sequencing allows you to get the hardest and most time-consuming part of the project out of the way first. This should keep your motivation high throughout the process, and by the time you've finished with the first few tasks, the rest is easy. It will also prevent you from stalling near the finish line since you're not leaving the toughest work for last. Sequencing allows you to track your progress against the deadline you're trying to meet. Say you're three weeks into a six-week assignment and you've completed half the tasks on your list. Because you front-loaded your schedule with the most challenging and time-consuming tasks, you can be confident that you'll meet your deadline, since the second half of your list should take less time to finish than the first. If you find yourself behind schedule, you'll need to adjust your estimates and allocate more time to the project going forward. As long as you catch it early on, your deadline will be within reach. Overcome procrastination. We all put off work, usually more, so the work that we dread is not always a bad thing. If the work is unimportant and non-urgent, it should be low on your list of priorities. But when you have the choice to do more important work, less important work, or nothing at all, and you consistently pick the latter two, procrastination can become a real problem. Understanding why you're procrastinating can help you stop. Once you pinpoint the cause, use one of these remedies. 1. Set deadlines. 2. Start small. 3. Ask for help. 4. Make it a game. Avoid interruptions. Not all interruptions are equal, but sometimes we treat them as if they were. Give yourself some ground rules to ensure that if your attention is being diverted, you're making the right choice about what to focus on. Here's a rule of thumb. If the problem is urgent and important, take care of it as soon as possible. Yes, it steals focus from the task at hand, but as discussed in the previous chapter, this category of concern should be your highest priority. If the problem doesn't meet immediate attention, it's going to take up more than a few minutes of your time, move it to a time box that you've dedicated progressively to work. None of the options above are viable. Refer the interrupting person to a colleague who could also handle his or her problem as well as or even better than you could. Email. Next up is a session about email. I'm going to skip this section because I don't really care about it. Meetings. Meetings, unlike boomer emails, can take up a large amount of your day. If you're shuttling from conference room to conference room for hours at a time, it's hard to get important work done. Meetings serve important purposes, though. They keep everyone informed, solicit critical points of view, and give boomers a sense of purpose. Some meetings fail to meet those goals. They're superfluous and inefficient. These are the meetings to watch out for. Whether you own meetings or whether you're just an attendee, consider whether the time you're spending in conference rooms is valuable. If you run meetings, don't always default to an hour-long meeting. Consider scheduling 20- or 50-minute meetings so that you and your attendees can complete follow-up tasks within the remaining 10 minutes. Cancel an instance of a recurring meeting if you don't have an agenda. If you're scheduling a meeting to share information, consider whether a simple email would be an adequate option. Reserve meetings for items that require direct response from your team, or if the matter is sensitive enough that your attendees would want to hear it from you in person. If you are a meeting invitee, be more selective when accepting meeting invitations. Ask yourself this question. If you were to call in sick the day of the meeting, would it need to be rescheduled? If the answer is no, then you may be able to decline it. If you're swamped with work and need some breathing room, evaluate the meetings already on your calendar. If you run an instance of a recurring meeting that doesn't have an agenda posted, are there any meetings that you could skip or move? Don't assume that just because a meeting is on your calendar that that time is inviolable. Think on your feet. These traps and roadblocks are ever-present in our work lives, and we'll be able to completely avoid them. But if you're on the lookout for them and have a solid plan in place to deal with them, you'll do a better job making good time management decisions. Reassess yourself. Reassess yourself. Time management isn't a one-and-done process. Even if you track your time, follow a detailed and smart plan, time-block your tasks, and avoid common pitfalls, continue to assess and reassess your progress. Great time managers don't just prepare and then stick to their plans, they also improvise. Are you still on track? We can lose sight of the big picture goals, so it's important to slow down to make sure our priorities still line up with those objectives and ask, are we still on track? The best way to do this is to schedule self-checkups. The frequency of your checkups will depend on your situation. If you're juggling multiple projects and deadlines, you may want to assess yourself each week, every few days, or even at the end of each day. If you're checking off every item on your to-do list, meeting deadlines, hitting milestones, and finding ample time to work on your projects, tasks, and skills that mean the most to you, then once a month is probably just fine. A checkup gives you the chance to identify whining signs and areas that need improvement. Ask yourself these questions. Do I feel prepared and focused each day? Do I feel like I have enough time to get everything done? Am I completing my scheduled tasks? Am I making reasonable progress each week? Do I frequently work at a comfortable, non-frenzied pace? Are my time estimates more accurate than before? Am I meeting deadlines? Am I achieving my goals? These are the questions to get started, but feel free to add your own. Getting back on track. Your answers to those prior checkup questions will determine your course of action. On track, if you answered yes to most of the questions, that means you're on the right track. Great. Keep it up. Make adjustments as you see fit. Even though everything might be going well, take the time to write down anything that you learned since your last checkup. If you answered off track to any of the questions, then you may need to make a few modifications. Some of the changes may be obvious. If you're not meeting deadlines, you'll be able to fix the problem by adding more time to your estimates in the future. But some may take more work to figure out. If you're not on track to meet your overarching goals, for example, you may have to do some soul searching. A good place to start is to picture a vision you created, your priorities, goals, and time allocations. Whether you're on track or off track, the important thing is to keep learning. So make some changes. Try to get better. Assess and reassess. As long as you prepare, plan, prioritize, and pivot, you'll grow into an effective time manager. So make some changes. Try to get better. Assess and reassess. As long as you prepare, plan, prioritize, and pivot, you'll grow into an effective time manager.