Managing projects. The basics. The basics. Let's talk about what a project is and what project management is all about. Every project can be broken down into four phases. Planning, build up, implementation, and close out. This makes the whole enterprise of project management much easier to get your mind around. What constitutes a project? A project is a good-sized task that someone wants done. Unlike a process, it has a beginning, middle, and end. Building a house is a project. So is launching a new product or developing a new marketing campaign. Some companies are project-based. That's all they do. Think of construction and engineering firms, advertising agencies, custom manufacturers, etc. Other businesses rely on processes for their everyday operations. Launching a project only when they want to make a change or undertake something new. Whatever the context, the word project usually refers to a well-defined task involving a group of people working together. Projects can last any amount of time, and most take somewhere between a month and a year to complete. What project management involves. Every project needs someone in charge. Big projects are led by professional project managers. Smaller ones are led by the people who must add the project to their regular work. Regardless of job size, the buck stops with these project managers. They must oversee the project through from start to finish. They draw up the plan, assemble the team, decide how to allocate resources, schedule the work, watch the budget, solve problems, and do a lot of other things. This is a big responsibility even when the project is moderate in scope. Project managers often find themselves working with a team of volunteers, colleagues who have regular assignments, and supervisors who have agreed to contribute time to the project. When that's the case, the project managers rarely have direct authority over the team members, and so they must get people working together effectively without giving orders. In short, project management requires organizational skills, financial skills, and people skills. The four phases of every project. What does designing a car, developing a website, moving a company, cleaning up a disaster site, and updating the information system all have in common? They're all projects, and so therefore they go through the same four phases discussed prior. Planning. In this initial phase, you define the problem and identify the stakeholders. That is, everyone who has a vested interest in the project. Here you also map out your goals and determine what you'll need to accomplish them. Build up. This is when you assemble your team. You review the individual tasks, develop a schedule and a budget, and hold your kickoff meeting. Implementation. Now the project is underway. People are busy working on their assigned tasks, you're holding regular meetings, monitoring the schedule and the budget, and preparing regular reports. You're also resolving the many unexpected issues that inevitably will pop up. Closeout. The project is complete. Your job has been handed off to whoever will be responsible for the final product or the new process. You review the team's accomplishments and lessons learned, and prepare a final report. Each phase has its own set of goals, activities, tools, and skills. Even though each phase is different, you'll find yourself returning to tasks from earlier phases. In the planning phase, your activities can include determining the real problem to solve, identifying stakeholders, defining project objectives, determining scope, resources, and major tasks, preparing for trade-offs. In the build-up phase, the activities include assembling your team, planning assignments, creating the schedule, holding a kickoff meeting, and developing a budget. In the implementation phase, your activities can include monitoring and controlling the process and budget, reporting progress, holding weekly team meetings, and managing problems. In the closeout phase, your activities might include evaluating the project performance, close the project, debrief with the team, and develop a post-evaluation report. The key skills at each of the project phases include, for planning, task analysis, planning, cost-benefit analysis of options. In the build-up phase, the key skills include process analysis, team building, delegation, negotiation, recruiting and hiring, communication. The key skills in the implementation phase include supervising, leading, and motivating, communication, conflict management, and problem solving. Finally, the key skills in the closeout section include follow-through, planning, and communication. The tools required in each of these project phases are as follows. In the planning phase, work, breakdown, and structure. In the build-up phase, the tools include scheduling tools like CPM, PERT, and Gantt. The tools in the closeout phase include post-evaluation report, analysis, and lesson time. Planning your project. Planning your project. The first phase of managing a project is to make an overall plan. Usually this involves five key steps. Number one, define the real problem. Number two, identify your stakeholders. Number three, set the project's goals. Number four, prepare for trade-offs. Number five, spell out the tasks. We'll take each one in turn. Define the real problem. Too often project managers leap to the solution before they completely understand what they are trying to solve. As a result, they miss the mark and disappoint their stakeholders. That's why defining the problem is such a crucial step. To focus your efforts, answer these questions. What issue do people think this project will address? Why do they see this as a problem that needs solving? Who has a stake in the solution or the outcome? Do all stakeholders have the same goal, and do their goals differ? What criteria can we use to judge this project's success? Identify your stakeholders. To identify your stakeholders, answer these questions. Which functions or people will the project activities or outcomes affect? Who will contribute resources? People, space, time, tools, and money to the project? Who will use and benefit from the project's outcome? Set the project's goals. Any project's success is determined by how well it meets its goals. In defining goals, think smart. They should be specific, measurable, action-oriented, realistic, and time-limited. Keep in mind the following factors as you set your goals. Quality. Establish the project's quality standards and determine how to measure and satisfy them. Organization. Make sure you have access to the people that you need. Ultimately, your team must help you achieve your goals. Communication. Determine with your stakeholders what information they need and how best to deliver it. Keeping stakeholders informed is always important. Risk. Identify the most likely risks and evaluate the possible responses. Once you've sketched out your goals, discuss them with the person who asked you to undertake the project. Don't shrink from agreeing to ambitious goals. Just make sure you'll get the time, people, and money necessary to reach them. Prepare for tradeoffs. Scope, schedule, and budget are the three related variables that most often determine what you can achieve. The basic formula is as follows. Scope equals schedule plus budget. If you change any one of these variables, you'll have to change at least one of the others. Most tradeoffs aren't so dramatic. They happen frequently in the ordinary course of the project. In software projects, lead designers usually work directly with end users to discuss functionality, budget, and timeline. In construction, architects and engineers meet regularly with customers to discuss possible new features and their implications. Remember that a less ambitious or even lower quality product is not necessarily a bad thing. The key is to establish a level of quality or functionality that meets the needs of the end users and fits the budget and scheduling requirements. Knowing from the start which of these three variables is most important to each stakeholder will help you make appropriate tradeoffs. Often, you'll spot tradeoffs before your stakeholders do. When that happens, it's your responsibility to inform them of any changes you'd like to make in a project's scope, schedule, or budget, and then negotiate a satisfactory solution. Spell out the tasks. Many projects fail. They don't get the hoped-for results or they come in way over budget or way past the deadline. Often, the roots of failure lie in the planning stage. The project manager overlooked a significant part of the necessary work, for example, or grossly underestimated the time and money required. One tool that can help you avoid such unfortunate outcomes is a work breakdown structure, or a WBS. A WBS shows the scope of a project's work. You use it to develop estimates, assign personnel or tasks, and track progress. Here's the basic idea. You subdivide each complex activity into the smallest units possible to make the work more manageable. It isn't hard to create a WBS. You just do the following three things. Number one, ask what must be done to accomplish each major task in the project. Number two, keep asking these questions while you've broken everything down into components or tasks that you don't want to subdivide further. Number three, estimate how long it will take to complete each of these smaller tasks and how much each will cost in dollars and personnel hours. As a rule, you'll stop dividing tasks when you reach the point where the work will take the smallest unit of time you want to schedule. Do you want to schedule the nearest day, for instance? Break down the work into tasks that take at least one day to perform. A WBS typically consists of three to six levels of subdivided activities. The more complex the project, the more levels it will have. Generally speaking, though, no project should have more than 20 levels, and only an enormous project would have that many. Estimation is difficult, and you'll get better with it as you gain experience. In the meantime, base your estimates on the average expected time to perform a task, not on hopes or prayers. Don't allow these estimates to become firm commitments at this stage. When you talk to stakeholders about estimates, share all the assumptions and risks that you've built into them. Building up your project. Building up your project. With the plan in place, it's time for the project to be underway. This is the build-up phase. In this phase, you'll follow these steps. Number one, assemble your team. Number two, set the schedule. Number three, develop a budget. As before, we'll cover each of these separately. Assemble your team. Now that you've used the Work Breakdown Structure, or WBS, to estimate your required activities and tasks, you can start recruiting people with the skills you need. Generally speaking, you want a phenomenal team. Try hard to get the best people you can. If you can't find them in your own organization, investigate whether you can bring them in from elsewhere. It's often more productive to import a great team member from another department than to rely on a mediocre contributor from the next people. We can't always get to choose our people. If your team has been assigned to you, you will need to assess members' skills and compare them with the skills you need for the project. You may decide that to provide training or perhaps even hire an outside expert to fill some gaps is the necessary route. If so, factor the additional time and money into your budget and schedules. Companies often create cross-functional teams. Leading a group like that can be tough, especially when members haven't worked together before. As the project manager, you're responsible for integrating their efforts. But your team members must understand how to manage their own parts of the project, and they must all be willing to work as a group. If you've built your own team or inherited members you know, you've probably already decided who will do what. But if you're leading a new, unfamiliar group, you'll have to get to know everyone before assigning tasks. It's helpful, then, to list the people on the project team, list the required skills, talk to each member of the team about what skills they can contribute, and then match people to tasks in consultation with the group. This method begins the process of building team communication and cohesion. Plan a kickoff meeting. After you've assembled your team, get members involved immediately at a kickoff meeting. Go over the project's goals and plan with them in as much detail as possible. Review the proposed schedule and discuss roles and responsibilities. Ask questions like, can everybody commit to the plan? Can everybody commit to the schedule? What is the best way for us to work together? Encourage people to point out potential trouble spots and to offer suggestions for improvement. Take all suggestions seriously, especially in areas where the team members have more experience than you do. Then adjust your estimates and activities accordingly. Set the schedule. Most projects come with a fixed beginning and end. Scheduling is a universal task. Each project has a schedule, and every project manager must be able to set one. And nearly everything takes longer than you think it will. Here's how to begin. Start by looking at a drop-dead date, one that cannot be changed. It might be the date of a trade show or a regulatory agency's deadline to receive a certain document. Whatever it is, work backwards from it to set all other dates. Go back to your work breakdown structure, your WBS, which lists the tasks that must be accomplished. Assign a deliverable to each one, such as rough draft of survey questions or prototype for test marketing. You can then use these deliverables to flesh out your schedule, because you've already determined about how long each task will take. Confirm that your due dates and milestones are realistic. No project team wants to be burdened with a schedule that's impossible to move. At this point, flag any potential bottlenecks. These are the things that must be completed before any other activities can begin. You may want to figure out a way to remove those bottlenecks. If that's not possible, build in extra time so that you can be confident that those won't hold things up. This is also a good point to establish a procedure for updating or revising the schedule. No schedule is permanent. Keep your stakeholders informed about any modifications in the project's overall progress. Using the critical path method. The critical path method, or CPM, helps you schedule project activities and allocate resources efficiently. It shows you which tasks are critical, that is, which ones you actually must complete on schedule to finish the entire project. Steps in the critical path method. Number one, list all the activities with brief descriptions. Number two, record how long each one will take. Number three, list all tasks that must be completed before you start each activity. Number four, draw a diagram showing these task relationships. Number five, compute the time required for each task. Number six, calculate the time required for each task. Number seven, calculate the time required for each task. Number eight, calculate the time required for each task. Number five, compute the earliest start time for each activity. Number six, compute the earliest finish time for each activity. Number seven, identify the critical path to estimate the entire project's duration. Software programs can help you construct more complex versions of the critical path, but it's good to understand the basic ideas before you turn to your computer. Gantt charts and PERT charts. P-E-R-T charts. These are two other widely accepted tools for scheduling and monitoring projects. Bar charts, such as the Gantt charts, and flow charts, such as the Performance Evaluation and Review Technique, or PERT charts. A Gantt chart illustrates the status of your project, its estimated duration, the duration of each task, and the sequence of activities. Some project managers prefer PERT charts. It illustrates the critical path and lays out project milestones. A PERT chart is a handy tool for communicating the big picture to team members. It shows the following. When every project task within a phase should begin, how much time is scheduled for each task, all tasks in progress at a given time, and all the differences between outcomes, tasks, and events. When choosing your scheduling system, bar charts are good for showing stakeholders and end users how the project is progressing. A flow chart may be better for managing tasks and communicating detailed information to supervisors and the people doing the work. The best method for scheduling a project is the one, of course, that you're most comfortable with and that works the best for the task at hand. Using software for project scheduling. Most project managers use software programs to help with project scheduling and management. To determine which one is best for you, research the various options online. Get recommendations from other people. Compare their work habits and projects with your own to decide whether the software is likely to be a good fit. Develop a budget. The budget is the project's financial blueprint. It translates activities into money, showing what you have to spend, and often, what you expect your returns to be. Begin developing your budget by determining the project's costs. You can usually break them down into the following categories. This is typically your largest part of the budget. Have you included both the costs of your current team members and any contract workers you may want to add? Is everyone on-site or will you bring in people from other locations? Training. Does everyone know how to use the equipment or tools needed to accomplish the work? Do your team members possess all the required skills? If they require training, can it take place on-site or will it involve travel? Will you need any specialized materials or equipment in addition to the usual range of office supplies and tools? Will you have to relocate people to do the work? How much room will they require and at what cost? Research. What will you have to buy, studies or data, perhaps, to support this project? Will you need outside research help? Capital expenditures. Will you require any capital equipment, machinery, specialized computer equipment, and so on to do the job? Overhead. What is your projected overhead expense? Keep in line with your company's standard overhead percentage. Once you've entered the figures from these standard categories into the budget, ask yourself what you forgot. A budget, no matter how carefully planned, is just your best guess. Track your actual expenditures carefully. They'll probably deviate from your original estimates. Stay as flexible as possible within your overall budget. Managing your project. Managing your project. In the implementation phase, you're managing and monitoring your project against the plans and preparations you've made. You have to maintain a positive attitude to keep your team motivated. Watch carefully for barriers, bottlenecks, and foul-ups. It can be a tough balancing act. You and your team will see progress in this phase. The work is actually being done. The details can feel tedious, often overwhelming, and potential pitfalls are always lurking around the corner. Let's look at some ways to maximize the progress and ease the stress. Delegate. Delegate. Attract results. Be flexible enough to make adjustments as you go. Delegate. Delegate two kinds of tasks. The first consists of routine activities that pretty much anyone on the team can do. With these, you want to ensure that everyone shoulders a fair portion and no one is saddled with all the mundane work. The second kind of tasks to delegate are tasks that require specialized skills. If any of your team members possess these skills, you can delegate such activities to them. If not, you may need to hire outside experts. As a project manager, you're responsible for the overall project, so don't delegate tasks that only you can perform, such as monitoring the budget. Trust and track. Managers used to monitor their support teams closely, telling them what to do at every step of the way. The system was called command and control. Most companies these days have given up that kind of management for something more like trust and track. Monitor progress against the schedule. Whether you do it by hand or use project management software, you need a systematic method of checking all tasks as people complete them. Most project managers use software for everything except very small undertaking. Do some research and make inquiries before you decide what to use and how to use it. Focus on what's important when monitoring progress. As you track the details of a project, it's easy to get lost in the weeds, but keep asking yourself the following questions to maintain the proper big-picture view. What do we need to accomplish with this project? What activities are essential to its overall success? Which elements are the most important to monitor? What are the major bottlenecks? Where must we place controls to keep things on track? Emphasize timely information. To respond usefully when problems or unexpected events crop up, you need to receive quick, frequent progress reports. Ideally, you'll be updated in real time, so you always know exactly where the project stands. In many cases, however, you'll need to rely on weekly updates. Just be sure to come back in on time, and accurately track the status of each task. Be prepared to take corrective actions when something goes off the rails, though. Otherwise, all you're doing is monitoring, not exercising control. Monitor progress against the budget as well. One of your most important responsibilities is tracking the budget. Regardless of how carefully you have planned, actual costs rarely match what you have budgeted. Good project managers maintain the original estimates as a reference point, but they also keep a running tally of where they have run over or under budget. If they see the total budget is likely to exceed the original amount, they make their case as soon as possible to whoever holds the purse strings with a clear explanation as to why they'll need more money. When monitoring actual costs, watch out for these common contingencies, which can upset your original estimates. Unanticipated price hikes from suppliers and subcontractors. Estimates based on different costing methods, for example, hours versus dollars. Unplanned personnel costs required to keep the project on schedule, including increased overtime. Unexpected training costs, unexpected space needs, or consultant fees to resolve unforeseen problems. As real expenses start rolling in, watch for significant deviation from budgeted amounts, then find out the reasons for the differences. Not all budget news is bad. When you monitor your budget against real costs, you may find that you are actually spending less than expected. Everyone likes to hear that. Ensure quality control. Quality assurance will play a major role in the success of your project. The last thing you need is for a client or customer or stakeholder who is dissatisfied with the end result. How do you ensure quality? A few guidelines help. Determine the quality benchmarks in the planning phase. Consider the quality policy of the organization, stakeholder requirements, the scope of the project, and any external regulations or rules. Don't rush quality checks to meet the deadlines. The cost of fixing problems after the fact is usually far greater than the cost of confronting and solving them early on. Examine the deliverables using the most appropriate tools. Accept or reject deliverables based on previously defined measures. Rejected deliverables can be returned or reworked, depending on cost. Report progress to stakeholders. Back in the planning phase, you agreed with your stakeholders how and when you'd present your updates. As the progress progresses in the implementation phase, consult with them to make sure that you're giving them the right amount of information in a useful format. If you hide or downplay problems as they come up, they may grow into full-blown crises, becoming twice as big as they would have if you had alerted your stakeholders early on. Be honest with them at every step. Dealing with your project's problems. Managing projects often means dealing with the unexpected. Managing projects often means dealing with the unexpected, which can be both exciting and nerve-wracking. Scope creep. One of the most common issues is scope creep. Your client or some group of stakeholders wants you to add new deliverables to the project. In software circles, this phenomenon is often called feature creep. This is only human. Once people see that you can probably accomplish A, B, and C, they begin thinking that D and E might be good as well. Some homeowners set out to replace a sink and a countertop and end up remodeling their entire kitchen. As a project manager, you have an obligation to consider reasonable changes in scope. However, you also must remind stakeholders that they can't increase scope without also increasing the budget, adding time, or both. Unless those changes can be made to the satisfaction of all concerned, it's your job to stick to the project's original scope. Delays. It's also common to fall behind schedule. Some delays are unavoidable, so you can either remedy or improve the situation. The first step is to recognize the problem. If you've been monitoring progress carefully, you'll quickly notice when schedules are readjusted to accommodate delays or unexpected bottlenecks. The second step is to address the situation with your team. Team members may have ideas about how to get around the problem or compensate for it by implementing other parts of the project faster than planned. Budget overruns. Cost overruns happen all the time, but that doesn't make them any easier to deal with. If you notice that your costs are creeping up beyond what you've budgeted, you really only have three choices. Identify ways to reduce other expenses in those line items. Find savings elsewhere in the budget. Inform your stakeholders or client of the cost overruns in hopes of getting more resources allocated to the project. If you choose this route, be aware that it will be difficult and that you'd better have a good explanation for why your costs are exceeding budget. One important rule always applies. At all costs, overruns are easier to handle than big ones. If you stay on top of your expenditures week in and week out, you'll be better able to address overruns before they spiral out of control. People issues. People problems are often the most difficult challenges in project management. Rather than ignoring, avoiding, or denying them, address them quickly and decisively. Try to handle people problems before they get too big. Pay attention to the small signs, such as a team member's increased irritability, loss of enthusiasm, or difficulty making decisions. Bring your project to a successful conclusion. The final stage in the life cycle of a project is the phase-out, during which your team completes its work. If all went as planned, the task fulfilled, the problem solved, the stakeholders satisfied, then congratulate yourself and your team. It's time to celebrate. If, as is more likely, you hit some rough spots along the way, the project took longer than expected, the results were less than hoped for, or cost exceeded estimates, it's still important to recognize the team's efforts and accomplishments. In either case, before the team moves on to another project or breaks up and parts company, debrief and document the process together so that the full benefit of the lessons can be learned. Prepare the handoff. Some projects, a book, a house, a software program, are products delivered to the client complete. They may need some final tweaking, but once they're done, they're done. Other projects, such as a new call center protocol or a new procedure for hospital intake, may not have such a neat and clean ending. The project team develops the process, modifies it as necessary, and hands it off to operating managers on the go-live date. In practice, project team members may be called in to consult and to adjust the processes necessary. Especially in the latter case, it's the project manager's job to prepare the client to assume responsibility. Here's what we agree the new process will accomplish, here's what we came up with, and here's what you'll need to do to carry it out. The transition from project to regular operations is often difficult, but you can avoid it, and it's often the key to success. Conduct a post-project evaluation. In a post-project evaluation, you bring your team together for one last meeting to identify what went well and what went wrong. Make a list of best practices and lessons learned to help future projects go smoothly. Encourage a spirit of learning. Use the evaluation as an opportunity to figure things out, not as a time to criticize and blame. If possible, bring in an outside facilitator. An outsider can objectively assess the information presented and set a constructive tone for the team's discussions. Team members often lose perspective after working so closely with one another. A skilled facilitator can sort out the emotional issues from the practical ones. Develop a useful final report. The final report documents all the information that will be useful, not only for the current project manager, team members, and stakeholders, but also for people planning future projects. A typical post-project evaluation report includes project status. What were the original objectives and were they achieved? Future status. Was the project a self-contained entity that now has completed its goals, or will it be incorporated into an ongoing process? If the latter, who is responsible for that process? Risk assessment. Did the project encounter any pitfalls that endangered its success? Was it in danger of running significantly over budget or incurring other major liabilities? Information relevant to other projects. What lessons can be applied in the future? Thank everyone and prepare for the next project. Sit down, thank every team member personally for his or her contribution. Acknowledge the bumps experienced in the journey, but mark the conclusion with good cheer. You may wish to take everyone out for pizza or a nice dinner. This is a time to celebrate and give pats on the back. Of course, you shouldn't ignore the challenges that individual team members may have presented along the way. If people were repeatedly late or uncooperative, let them know that you noticed that behavior. Help them understand that they will have a better time in the future if they can mend their ways. In your final report, make it plain that you would be glad to discuss the strengths and weaknesses of individual team members with future project leaders. Take some time, too, for personal reflection. What were your strengths and weaknesses as a project leader? What did you learn in the course of the project and what will you do differently next time? Project management is a skill. Like any other skill, it takes practice. Test yourself. Test yourself. Here are 10 multiple-choice questions to help you identify your baseline knowledge of project management. Number one, you've been assigned a project and it appears to have explicit expectations and clearly outlined responsibilities. Before you begin planning, what should you do? A, ensure that the funding has been approved. B, confirm that the project is solving the right problem. The answer here should be B. Why is it critical... Number two, why is it critical to spend time early in the planning phase identifying all the stakeholders in your project's activities or outcomes? A, to find potential champions who will support the project. B, to ensure that the project objectives meet everyone's expectations of success. Or C, to be politically astute and identify possible obstacles early. B, to ensure that the project objectives meet everyone's expectations of success. Three, this book advises you to be aware of scope creep. What is scope creep? A, unwittingly giving in to pressure to do more than originally planned for. Or B, agreeing to extend the schedule without a corresponding increase in funding. Here, the answer should be A. When you are defining project objectives, what three variables most often determine what you can achieve? A, resources, how realistic the project is and the availability of team members. B, complexity, time, and the expectation of stakeholders. Or C, scope, schedule, and budget. The answer here should be C. Number five, what do you do when you create a work breakdown structure? A, dividing the overall project into smaller tasks and then subdividing those tasks further until you get to the desired task size. Or B, distributing the funding that you have across the project objectives in order to anticipate personnel and activity costs. The answer here should be A. Six, when assembling a team for your project, make sure that you have a group that A, will get along during the project. B, is dedicated to the success of the project. C, has all the skills needed for the project. The answer here should be B. Number seven, you need to track what has to be done, how long each activity will take, in what order everything has to happen, and who is responsible for what. Which project management tools will do this? A, work breakdown structure. Or B, Gantt or PERT charts. The answer here should be B, Gantt or PERT charts. Eight, complete this statement. A budget is not only a list of all the costs involved in executing the project, but also, blink. A, a summary of all the skills you need to complete the project. B, a tracking tool that allows the manager to monitor implementation. Or C, a tool that as a manager, you can use to justify any future need for additional funds. The answer here should be C. Actually, the answer here should be B. Question nine, when developing budgets, project managers frequently overlook which of the following variables. A, personnel. B, travel. C, supplies. D, maintenance. Or E, research or training. The answer here should be D. Ten, in the best of all possible worlds, who conducts the evaluation of a completed project? A, the project manager, with all stakeholders providing input. B, an independent person who can be objective. C, the individual or individuals who identify the initial problem and project. The answer here should be B.