The entire first half of the book can be summarized by prepare yourself well, ask yourself genuinely and sincerely why you are reading the first place, have an agenda, sequence the agenda logically, invite the right people and leave out the people who don't need to be there. Assign roles in the meeting. Some of these roles can include have a scribe, have an expert, have a contributor, have a facilitator. Most importantly, ask yourself, do you really need a meeting? It's better not to hold a meeting if you don't have time to prepare for the meeting. It's better not to hold a meeting if another method of communicating would work as well or better. It's better not to hold a meeting if the subject isn't worth everyone's time. It's better not to hold a meeting if your group members are upset over a conflict or other problem and need time apart before being ready to address the situation. It's better not to hold a meeting if the subject is a personnel issue that's better handled one-on-one. It's better not to hold a meeting if you need to solicit a number of individuals' opinions. Here is a meeting preparation checklist. Have you identified the specific purpose of the meeting, made sure you need a meeting at all, developed a preliminary agenda, selected the right participants and assigned roles, decided where and when to hold the meeting and confirmed availability of the space, sent the invitation notifying participants when and where the meeting will be held, sent the preliminary agenda to key participants and other key stakeholders, sent any reports or items needing advance preparation to participants, followed up with invitees in person if appropriate, identified, if appropriate, the decision-making process that will be used in the meeting, identified, arranged for, and tested any required equipment, finalized the agenda and distributed it to all participants, verified that all key participants will attend and know their roles, and finally, have you prepared yourself? Leading your meeting. At the start of the meeting, start on time. Give an introduction. Watch the ground rules. Execute the agenda. Keep the meeting moving. Make sure all points of view are heard. Ask general questions such as, have we forgotten anything? Don't allow louder, more vocal attendees to dominate. Say that you'd love any feedback people think of after the meeting as well, once they've had a time to reflect. If virtual, make sure all participants are heard. Provide vocal cues for virtual attendees that they'd get visually if they were present. It can be difficult for virtual meeting attendees to speak up, interrupt, or chime in when they disagree with a colleague. If your meeting has a dozen or more participants, break the group down into pairs or trios. Have each group report back about a particular agenda item. Ask someone to play devil's advocate to bring different points of view. When you sense that you've hit upon an issue of particular interest, watch for body language that indicates someone might be eager to speak. Acknowledge such people with eye contact or a nod, figuring that you see them and you'll call on them in a minute. Give the group a little time to think things over. Don't be in a rush to vote or reach a decision after you've discussed an issue. Remember the golden rule of management, praise in public, criticize in private. Maintain multi-taskers. Discourage your attendees, whether they are in the room or on a phone from another location, from engaging in other communications during the meeting. Closing the meeting. The closing phase of the meeting doesn't have to be long, but it does need to set up what happens next. Set the right tone so participants are motivated to follow through on their action items. Begin by summarizing the session. Either the leader or participant you appoint can perform this function. Reiterate key points, decisions, and next steps, along with who's responsible for what task. Finally, give a brief motivational message. Great discussion today. Thanks so much. We got a lot done. If the meeting was contentious, that's all the more reason to remind people about what went right. The day after, making your meeting stick. Consider sending a follow-up note. A good follow-up memo covers three basic elements, what, who, and when. What specific decisions and outcomes resulted from the meeting? Who has responsibility for the task that needs to be done? When must the task be completed? How did you do? The big follow-up question for you is, was your meeting effective? By reflecting on the success of your leadership, you can continue to grow. Judge by the results. Seek out the critics. What could you do better next time? Here's a meeting follow-up checklist. Have you written a succinct follow-up note including what, who, and when? Distributing the note to all participants. Recorded any tasks and due dates in your calendar so you can follow up to make sure they are completed. Send it to all other relevant stakeholders. Follow it up with key stakeholders in person to make sure they are aware of meeting highlights. Assess yourself as a leader. Assess the outcome of the meeting. Met with critics and thought through what you could do better next time. Running specific types of meetings. Solving a problem. When using a meeting to solve a problem, find out what the participants' perceptions of the problem are. Get agreement on the definition of the problem. Assess how long the problem has been going on and what is happening now. Determine what the group thinks are the causes of the problem. Outline the future consequences of the problem if not solved. Brainstorm options for solving the problem. Clarify the advantages and disadvantages of each option. Choose the most effective method for selecting an option. Consider the key factors such as time, resources, financials, values, and so forth. Reaching full agreement on an option for problem resolution or management. Making a decision. Decision-making meetings can be tricky since there's a fine line between encouraging people to feel that a decision-making meeting is a collaborative wielding of authority and actually making a final choice that may or may not have been the most popular option. By virtue of having a meeting about making a decision, you are implicitly signaling to your team that their opinion and buy-in is important, so you can't just hold a meeting and reality feels like it's just for information gathering or to encourage participants to rubber-stamp something that you've already made your mind up about. Instead, you need to be very clear to yourself and to the group how you intend to make the decision, your role as a leader, and how much you want the group to take ownership of the decision. Some options to consider when choosing the decision method in a meeting. Majority vote. The advantages of the decision method decided by majority vote are it generally allows for a decision in a relatively short period of time, widely perceived to be a fair way to decide things, the disadvantages are it creates public winners and losers. The losers feel their voices have not been heard, may not end with complete buy-in. When it's appropriate to use the decided by majority vote. If the decision will affect a large group of people and is not critical to the daily operations of your business, such as budgets or key clients, for example, you might be deciding how to best organize vacation priorities. Another decision-making method is decided through group consensus. The advantages are it usually results in complete understanding of the decision and its implications by all participants. There's a greater chance of buy-in from all parties. The disadvantages of deciding through group consensus are it's often much more difficult to reach, particularly if the group is unfamiliar with the process. Usually takes more time than other decision-making approaches. If no consensus can be reached, it effectively stops progress towards a decision. Consensus decisions are advisable when the necessary change requires complete understanding and buy-in from all parties, the decision requires the expertise of an entire group to design or implement it. The group itself is well-versed in the art of consensus decision-making. For example, if you need your team to agree to dramatically overhaul the way projects get done to be able to respond to client demands more quickly, everyone on the team needs to believe that a new workflow will actually work, even taking into account the challenges and that they personally can make their piece of the workflow chain work. If someone doesn't think the new plan is realistic or doable, for example, you don't have a real consensus and are likely setting up a new plan to fail. And finally, decision method is the leader decides. The advantage of this decision method is it's the fastest approach to decision-making. When time is short or there's a crisis, then this may be the best approach. Another advantage is participants will end up respecting the leader and the decision if they understand why the decision has been made. The disadvantages are participants may feel that their views have been ignored, particularly if they haven't been given the chance to state their ideas. Another disadvantage is buy-in of participants is less likely than with other decision-making approaches. When is this appropriate? One of the key jobs of a leader is knowing when and how to make tough decisions. Sometimes a group simply can't agree on a plan forward, either by majority or consensus. That's when it's critical for a leader to be willing to take a decision and enforce it. If you've run your meeting effectively, your team will feel as if their opinions were heard and considered and will support your decision in the end, even if they might have chosen a different path. For example, when extra work comes down the pike for people in your group and everyone's already feeling overtaxed, it's unlikely that they'll agree by consensus, which is the logical group of people or individuals to have work extra hours to get things done. You might, as a leader, need to hear each team member's workload and perspective and then make a decision as to who can really best handle the extra demands. When good meetings go bad and how to fix them. When good meetings go bad and how to fix them. Unfortunately, even if you followed all the guidelines for conducting an effective meeting, things can still go wrong. The best way to handle problems is to prepare for them as much as possible ahead of time by thinking about the attendees you've invited who tend to cause problems. What to do when participants arrive late or leave early. Consistently begin the end meetings on time. People will come to respect your time limits and boundaries. Give participants a job to do during the session. No one with an assigned responsibility wants to come in late to a meeting and scramble to get it done. At the beginning of the meeting, ask the group if everyone can stay until the destinated end time. If not, consider adjusting the length of the meeting. Preempt early departures. After the meeting and in private, ask the person why he or she missed part of the meeting. Find out what the underlying cause of the behavior may be, if possible. When one participant dominates the discussion, here's what you might do. If you are standing, walk closer and closer to the person. This tends to draw group attention to you and away from the speaker. Thank them for his input and call on someone else. If she finishes other people's sentences, encourage her to let other people speak for themselves. Ask the group to change roles so that the quiet people can speak up and those who have been talking remain silent for a while. For chronic interrupters during a break, ask them to drop down their thoughts and wait until there's a pause to contribute them instead of shouting them out. If the group keeps repeating points already made, keep track of ideas on a flip chart. Confirm your understanding of the ideas presented by active listening. That means restating ideas by saying something like, what I hear you saying is, and repeating back to the participant a fair and accurate summary of what he or she said. When someone begins to repeat an already listed idea, point to the chart or board and ask something like, hmm, it looks as though we've already covered that point. Is there something new you want to add? If people still keep coming back to the point, you can seek resolution on the spot, saying something like, well, this is obviously important to the group, so let's deal with it right now. Participants who disturbed the meeting, in this case, explain the ground rules for participant behavior at the beginning. Try asking a question, including the transgressors among the people you'd like to hear from. Try asking for a single focus, saying something like, our purpose today was to shape our innovation strategy for the year. Can we please focus on that again? Make fresh connections. If you've agreed on what to discuss and someone still seems off track, ask her to explain how the topics are related. You might learn of a correlation that you hadn't considered before. If so, let the team decide whether to explore that idea now or if it's unrelated but still important at a future meeting. Call for a break if the problem continues. Then during the break, ask people individually what's going on. Give the reasons for the disturbance and, if necessary, directly request the offending parties to stop. Tell them you'll address any legitimate concerns after the meeting. If the group gets stuck or confused, ask the group what's going on, if there's something that they don't understand or if they don't have enough information about. Remind the group what the agenda is and what the specific objectives of that item are. Ask the group if there is a key point or issue that has not been raised and needs to be. Suggest a short break. Then return to the topic at hand and move it to a later position on the agenda or to a later meeting. If all else fails, remove the item from the agenda. You don't need to be a superhero. Your goal is to make your meeting effective. If something isn't ripe for good discussion, take it off the agenda and rethink how to better address the issue moving forward. If the group falls silent, you might then consider allowing silence for a full minute. While you might want them to respond right away, consider that thoughtful comments come from participants who take time to organize or articulate their reactions. Don't be afraid of silence. Ask the group directly. I notice that you've fallen silent. Can someone say what's happening here? Ask people if they would like you to clarify something. Ask them if you are unaware of a key point or issue or if you have caused some confusion. Think about whether your behavior might be the problem. Ask yourself if you came on too strongly in an opinion or preconceived solution. Ask the group if there is something everyone's avoiding discussing that's important. Take a short break to refocus and find new energy. But be clear that when the break is over, you expect to focus and finish. If the group seems worn out, consider ending the meeting and rescheduling. What to do when there's an elephant in the room. The group may avoid an issue or attempt to focus on one issue to the exclusion of others because members are afraid to bring up a particular subject. If you don't realize that there's such an issue in advance of the meeting, you are likely to have some clues in the room. Be prepared for problems and challenges to come up. Stay calm and remind yourself and your team that your goal is to make it a productive session and that you want to keep everyone focused on having a healthy, productive conversation.