Why Feedback Matters. Giving constructive feedback is essential to a productive work environment and it doesn't have to threaten your relationships. Approximately giving feedback can seem intimidating, but it's essential and ultimately beneficial. Feedback is often corrective, which means it's intended to help recipients change course or adjust practices when the current ones aren't working, and also be positive aimed at reinforcing good work and good patterns. There's much that we can accomplish in giving feedback. We can show direct reports and colleagues that you're attentive to them and their performance, signal appreciation, redirect undesirable behavior, point out more productive courses of action, contribute to others learning and developing more, and even motivate and inspire individuals to a higher level of performance. Finally, it fosters open communication and enhances teamwork while strengthening your rapport with co-workers. Feedback can be used to be a regular part of anyone's job. That said, we can have our reservations about it. What Makes Feedback Effective? For feedback to be heard and used, you have to deliver it at the right time and in the right way. To understand that, you need to understand what makes feedback effective. Core components are that feedback is shared frequently and within context, it aims to achieve an outcome, it's realistic in expectations, it shows respect in two-way conversations, and expressed as a point of view rather than as an absolute truth, and it assumes an opportunity for following. These principles are the foundations to help improve the performance of your team and those around you. The first step, though, is overcoming our fear of giving feedback. There are many reasons why we might be afraid of giving feedback. You might worry that giving feedback will make the person dislike you or that it'll strengthen the relationship, or you might assume that the other person can't handle that feedback, or you might recall where no previous instances where the recipient resisted feedback or didn't act on it. We might imagine that the person is too stuck in their ways to provide feedback that would be helpful, or even that we might fear a volatile or awkward situation. The reality, though, is fearing the worst will only close you off from productive conversations. Providing both positive and corrective feedback on a regular basis will help you get used to having these types of conversations. Remember, not only is giving feedback worth the risk of straightening a relationship, it is essential for the health of the organisation. Choosing when to give feedback. Feedback isn't just something that we give when performance time rolls around. It should be an ongoing process woven into the daily fabric of our everyday lives. Feedback is most likely to have a positive and lasting effect when its focus is on behaviour that the recipient is able to change and is thoroughly as well-timed. Identify the right situations. Feedback is most useful in the following instances. When good work, successful projects, and resourceful behaviour deserve to be recognised. When the likelihood of improving a person's skills is high, because the opportunity to use those skills again is imminent. When the person is already expecting feedback, either because you've scheduled that time in advance, or because he or she knows that you have observed that behaviour. When a problem cannot be ignored because the person's behaviour is negatively affecting a colleague, team, or organisation. In other cases, feedback can be detrimental to the situation. Avoid giving feedback in scenarios where you do not have all the information about a given incident, and the only feedback you can offer concerns factors that the recipient cannot control. When the person who needs the feedback appears to be highly emotional, or especially vulnerable immediately after a difficult event. When you don't have the time or the patience to deliver the feedback in a calm and thorough manner. And when the feedback is based on your personal preference, not a need for more effective behaviour. Or when you have not yet formulated a possible solution to help the feedback recipient move forward. Bear in mind that when you give positive feedback frequently, your negative feedback will seem more credible and less threatening. When you deliver feedback, be honest about why you want to give it. Sometimes you might be reacting to your own needs and preferences, not the best for the team or org. Before you choose to give feedback, you need to understand whether the problem your colleague is facing is one that can be corrected. Things that might be easy to influence. Job skills, time and work management, knowledge, attitudes, things that are difficult to influence, habits, personality traits. Feedback is most likely to affect learning, growth, and change in areas that least threaten the recipient's sense of self-worth. When you provide feedback about attitudes, habits, and personality traits, those can hit close to home. Does that mean that you shouldn't try to give feedback about those things? Of course not. But it will be more effective to direct your efforts towards, say, getting that person to follow clearly outlined steps in the collaboration protocol, rather than making a blanket demand that he or she learn to enjoy teamwork. In other words, frame the request as a change in specific behavior or tasks, rather than a personality makeover. Timing the feedback. Once you've identified that feedback is the right route to take, identify the best time to sit down and have that conversation. It's important to give feedback soon after you observe a behavior that you want to discuss. It can be tempting to hold off to see if the behavior occurs again, or just because giving feedback can be hard to do. But you and the recipient will communicate most effectively about the situation when it's fresh on your minds. Comparison of feedback, coaching, and performance appraisals. The purpose of providing feedback is to reinforce or change behavior. The purpose of providing coaching is to improve skills. The purpose of performance appraisals is to evaluate past work. The participants in feedback are any two or more people. The participants in coaching are usually supervisor to direct report, but can be multidirectional. Participants in a performance appraisal include supervisor to direct report. The place for feedback is a private and quiet space. The place for coaching depends on the skill to be learned. The place for performance appraisals is usually in the supervisor's office. The tone of feedback is typically casual, though can be more formal. The tone of coaching, somewhat formal. The tone of performance appraisals, very formal. The timing of feedback should be frequent and as needed, or during formal sessions. The timing of coaching should be in regular meetings. The timing of performance appraisals is a pre-specified juncture, such as every six months or every year. The follow-up cycle for feedback and coaching is continual. The follow-up for performance appraisals is based on an action plan. Conducting a feedback session. Plan the interaction. No matter how quickly you need to give feedback to an employee, it's essential to prepare for the encounter. Gather all the information available about the behavior in question and its effect on the team or project to obtain an objective view of the issue. Ask yourself what you would do if the recipient were to object to what you understood to be the facts, or if she presented other evidence that you did not know about. Create a discussion plan. Jot down what you want to talk about and anticipate the recipient's reactions to the feedback session. Craft some follow-up responses. Prepare yourself to listen, not just talk. You might, for example, allow for half of the session to involve asking the recipient questions and half to be spent listening to answers. Anticipate what kinds of questions she might have and expect to answer them. Consider what you want to get out of the discussion, both in the short-term and the long-term. Organize your thoughts in writing. Consider the logistics of the feedback session. When possible, get the recipient in advance to notice that you want to speak with her regarding some performance feedback. Let's break down planning a feedback session. The points to prepare. A one-line overview. An example. Judy was rude when a customer called the IT helpdesk. Points to prepare. Objective report of the behavior. An example. The customer reported that Judy spoke in a sharp, trend of voice and said that she had no earthly idea how long the server would be down. The customer said that when he asked for a rough estimate, Judy shouted at him. Points to prepare. Report of the effect on the team or project. Example. Other helpdesk providers who overheard Judy's comments were distressed about them. The customer then complained, putting the reputation of the department and the company at risk. Points to prepare. Potential objections to the objective reports and how you'll address them. Example. Judy may deny that she spoke rudely, but she does point out that the customer's and other helpdesk providers' reports corroborate one another. Care to hear your understanding of what qualifies as rudeness? Points to prepare. Discussion plan. Example. Number one. Give Judy the facts and show that you're aware of what happened. Number two. Listen to Judy's version of events. Number three. Make clear that rude behavior to customers will not be tolerated. Number four. Brainstorm with Judy about ways to avoid frustrating moments in the future. Points to prepare. Possible barriers from the feedback. Example. Example. Judy may be angry and anxious. She may not want to discuss what happened. She might defend herself rather than try to describe events accurately. Points to prepare. Ways to overcome the barriers. Example. Don't be judgmental. Hear Judy's side of the story. Give her your undivided attention and be willing to listen if she has feedback for you. Points to prepare. What questions do you have? Example. What happened from Judy's point of view? How can she avoid losing control when frustrating moments occur in the future? Points to prepare. What questions might be asked? Example. Judy may want to know more about what sort of behavior qualifies as rudeness. She might want to know what she is supposed to do if a customer asks about an IT matter she doesn't know the answer to. She may ask what she is supposed to do to improve her performance in the future. Points to prepare. Desired short-term outcomes. Example. Have Judy commit to showing more respectful behavior towards customers immediately. Points to prepare. Desired long-term results. Example. Find a way to make conditions of Judy's job less frustrating for her. Initiate the exchange. A few moments. The first few moments of any feedback session are crucial. When you're giving positive feedback, sending good early signals is usually not difficult. The very context is often enough. Identify what you're praising in specific terms. Corrective feedback can be more difficult. There's no foolproof formula. Sit down without physical obstacles such as tables or desks between you. Avoid interruptions and adapt your communication style to that of the recipient. Assume a tone close to that of an experienced teacher. Show confidence in the guidance you provide but don't be patronizing or judgmental. Consider their point of view and perspective. Try to understand who they are and how they want to grow. Imagine yourself in the other person's shoes. Consider what you would need to hear in order to walk away from the conversation to do in order to be ready for positive change. Engage in dialogue. Whether you're giving positive or corrective feedback, once you've initiated the conversation and have described the issue to the recipient effectively, encourage them to explain the behavior in their own words. Take close attention to how they respond. Specifically, you should do the following. Listen actively. Notice nonverbal cues. Monitor your own reactions. Paraphrase what the recipient says. In cases of corrective feedback, after you share your concerns and listen to the recipient's point of view, you'll want to identify the core issues at play. It's not always as easy as it seems. Sometimes service behavior stems from a deeper problem. There is no easy script to follow for feedback discussions. Every conversation is different based on the situation and the people involved. But following the steps that we've covered in this chapter will give you the best chance at having a fruitful conversation. Developing an action plan. Specify next steps. For positive feedback, consider sharing the person's good work with others as an example or asking her to train or coach her colleagues on an area that she's excelled in. For corrective feedback, after you and your direct report or colleague have identified the core issue that needs to be addressed, work together to develop an action plan from that is mindful of the root cause of the behavior. Some options to consider. Offer a carrot. Find more interesting and satisfying assignments for the employee to work on as an incentive to arrive on time. Use a stick. Require that she be prompt and establish explicit consequences for tardiness. Seek an alternative. Explore the possibility of formally changing her hours so that she can come in an hour later and work an hour later each day or work from home one or more days per week. Use a stick. Find more interesting and satisfying assignments for the employee to work on as an incentive to arrive on time. Use a stick. Require that she be prompt and establish explicit consequences for tardiness. Seek an alternative. Explore the possibility of formally changing her hours so that she can come in an hour later and work an hour more days per week. Summarize the action plan. If there are multiple components, specify each one. Have the recipient show that they know what the next steps are. She might demonstrate her understanding by receiving them or by agreeing to something that you've written down. Identify when and how follow-up will occur. Be as specific as possible. Set a time frame for achieving the primary goal and her appropriate smaller goals along the way. Follow-up. For the sake of the employee, your team, and the organization, don't stop the process of change when the feedback session ends. After giving positive feedback, for example, continue to reinforce the good behavior. In cases of corrective feedback, continue to observe how the employee is doing and whether she is following the agreed-upon action plan. Specifically, you should check in regularly to ensure that the action plan is on track. Follow the schedule you outlined as closely as possible. Ask the employee to describe her progress. Encourage her to be as frank as possible with any obstacles that she may be encountering and what you can do to help them. Be explicit about improvements that you're noticing. Offer praise and reinforcement to bolster that progress. Be frank if you notice that progress has been too slow or not happening at all. Discuss options for getting the situation on track. Feedback is not a cure-all for workplace ills. You may discover that feedback recipient just isn't changing behavior, even after multiple feedback sessions. There are many reasons why this might be happening. The employee might disagree with you. They don't understand the need for change, or they just don't care. If a problem persists, despite vigilant and judicious follow-ups, you may have to take additional and, in some cases, more severe measures. If things aren't improving, consider if there's anything that you might be doing to add to the problem. Were you clear enough when you gave your feedback? Did the recipient understand what he should be doing and are you supporting him? Ask for help and advice from human resources. And, if you are not the person's manager, consider reaching out to his boss for assistance. If there is no improvement, the person may not be the right fit for the team or the organization. Assess yourself. Don't forget your own role in the process. You, too, should be learning from feedback discussions. After a feedback session, use Table 3, Evaluating the Feedback Process, to evaluate how the meeting went. Table 3, Evaluating the Feedback Process. Topic, under the category of process. Planning the feedback. Initiating the meeting. Discussing pertinent points. Listening to the recipient. Developing an action plan. Write down what worked and what could be improved. Under the topic of relationship. Communication style. Recipient's reaction. Level of mutual trust and respect. Write down what worked and what could be improved. And, finally, under the topic of results. Impact of changes. Timeliness of changes. Expectations and progress. Write down what worked and what could be improved. Handling difficult feedback situations. Some people are unresponsive when confronted with feedback, even when it's positive. The reasons for this may vary from a simple fear of not being liked, to preconceived notions about the person delivering the feedback, to cultural expectations about how to respond to authority. Whatever the reason, you must still handle the present situation directly, even if the person is uncomfortable. When you need to give feedback to a quiet, shy, or otherwise uncommunicative person, patience is key. Don't rush. Don't force. Give space for thinking. Give space for thinking and for speaking. That can go a long way. Make an effort to draw out the other person's point of view. Ask open-ended questions such as, what was your rationale for telling the customer you couldn't help them? How did you prepare for the presentation? These require more than yes and no answers. These types of questions, which are useful in any feedback session, show an uncommunicative person that you want to hear and understand their point of view. Managing potential volatile encounters. In contrast with non-communicators, some corrective feedback recipients may be openly defensive when confronted with criticism. That defensiveness may stem from the recipient's desire to convey his understanding of the facts. As part of your process, you will encourage them to share their point of view and their More often, however, defensiveness surfaces because productive and honest communication is breaking down, leading the recipient to misperceive your motives and intentions. More often, however, defensiveness surfaces because productive and honest communication is breaking down, leading the recipient to misperceive your motives and intentions. If you anticipate that your feedback session could become contentious, plan ahead. If the employee is already upset or angry, wait until she calms down before you engage her directly. Write down your feedback points in advance so you won't get distracted and forget them during the session. Plan and rehearse how you would respond to outbursts before you initiate the conversation. Plan to keep your feedback simple. Limit yourself to one or two primary points. Once you are in the session with the recipient, elicit the feedback from the recipient for their point of view, and actively listen to the response to avoid confrontations during the discussion. Soften the defensive posture with phrases that show them that they're being heard, such as, I hear what you're telling me. That's an important perspective. Note points of agreement between you to establish common ground. Comments like, you and I are on the same page about that, help to convey that you want to work with rather than against the other person. Remain composed. Speak slowly, calmly, and clearly. Avoid phrasing that might be interpreted as judgmental. For example, can you help me understand that point a bit better? It's much less conversational then. I have no idea what you mean. Redirect this focus away from the points of discussion. Oh, redirect this focus away from the points of dissension. Work on building small agreements with basic details. What happened, when, and so on. Giving feedback to high performers. Sometimes the toughest people to influence with feedback are those who do the best work. But giving your stars effective feedback is essential to keeping them engaged and motivated and helping them reach their potential. Experts agree that the principles of giving feedback when dealing with top performers is no different. Here are a few tips that can extend beyond the basics. Here are a few tips that can extend beyond the basics to those unique needs of top performers. Express gratitude for current performance. Understand the cost of great results. It's important to understand how top performers have achieved their exemplary outcomes and at what cost. Don't assume the star is perfect. Find out how you are doing. The better the performer, the more often she needs feedback. You and your organization depend on it. The better the performer, the more often she needs feedback. You and your organization depend on retaining top performers. So it's a wise investment of your time and energy to support and develop them. Giving them regular positive reinforcement and turning their attention to self-improvement allows your stars to celebrate success. Giving corrective feedback to your boss. A good rule of thumb is to tread lightly. A few tips can help. Identify the issues. Decide whether the matter is worth pursuing. Prepare carefully. Make an appointment. Describe the behavior and its impact on the team. Make a suggestion or a request, not a demand. Check for commitment to change. Giving corrective feedback to your boss is a relatively rare event, as are feedback situations that escalate to a crisis level. The best way to prevent the most difficult feedback situations from ever occurring is to create an overall work climate that encourages and welcomes feedback. Creating a receptive climate for feedback. Make feedback a priority in your organization. To show others that feedback is a large part of your organization or your team's culture, you need to set an example and give feedback regularly and visibly. Do this not only in your individual feedback discussions, but in your day-to-day actions as well. Don't sit back and wait for feedback to be offered, particularly if you're in a leadership role. Give positive feedback publicly. Acknowledging positive performance frequently and publicly is a good way to start building a culture of frequent feedback. And don't just do it yourself. State explicitly that you'd like everyone on your team to follow suit. By acknowledging good work, your direct reports and colleagues will trust your message and be more open to your corrective feedback when it's necessary. Start small. Don't assume that only big wins merit discussion. When you see a positive feedback, don't assume that only big wins merit discussion. When you see any behavior worth reinforcing or encouraging, acknowledge it and express appreciation. Praise effort, not the ability. Take a cue from research by Stanford psychologist Carol Dweck. Her work suggests that praising persistent efforts, even in failed attempts, helps build resilience and determination, whereas praising talent and ability results in risk aversion and heightens sensitivity to setbacks. A work climate that values efforts, therefore, can increase ability. Offer positive feedback. And stop there. Using positive feedback only to cushion the blow before delivering criticism will degrade the value of your praise and render it hollow. Set a tone that encourages others to offer feedback that's positive as an end in itself. Empower everyone. Address challenges as a group. Set clear expectations. Don't just do it yourself. Encourage questions. Make it okay to say no. Mastering the art of giving effective feedback takes time and attention. Whether you're a feedback novice or a skilled practitioner of the craft, the tactics specified will serve as reliable touchpoints that you can visit again and again. Thank you.